C O N F I D E N T I A L BERLIN 002546SIPDISSIPDISE.O. 12958: DECL: 08/27/2021TAGS: PGOV GMSUBJECT: SPD IN DRIVER'S SEAT FOR BERLIN ELECTION Classified By: PolCouns John Bauman. Reason: 1.4(b) and (d)1. (U) Summary. With three weeks to go, opinion polls and political commentators and contacts all say Berlin's September 17 election of a new parliament is the SPD's to lose. The Social Democrats lead the Christian Democrats by over ten percent in all polls and the ratings gap between the two parties' candidates for Mayor is even greater. Real interest is already focusing on whom the SPD will chose as a coalition partner  the Left Party.PDS with which the SPD now governs the city, or the Green Party. The election, which is expected, in essence, to confirm Berlin's left of center majority, will have no immediate national political implications. However, Mayor Wowereit has signaled his interest in playing a role in national SPD politics in the future. Because of the predicted low turnout, concerns have been expressed by some observers that parties of the far-right will gain seats in some of Berlin's district assemblies. End Summary.The Campaign: SPD in Charge; CDU in Tatters--------------------------------------------2. (C) The state of Berlin leaves much to be desired  the weak school system has been the subject of a steady drumbeat of critical headlines for months; the business climate is at best stagnant and high-profile departures or attempted departures of big employers are an issue; the city's enormous debt continues to grow steadily and is now at 60 billion euros. Nonetheless, support for the SPD remains strong at 30-35 percent (ahead of the 29 percent taken in 2001) and Mayor Wowereit is genuinely popular. CDU xxxxx admits that the CDU's lead candidate, Friedbert Pflueger, simply cannot match Wowereit for charisma and campaign skills. Moreover, the Berlin CDU has been damaged by: 1) years of infighting and tension between modernizers in the party, including Pflueger, and old-school conservatives; and 2) the lingering effects of a banking scandal that drove it from office in 2001. Pflueger, from Lower Saxony, also suffers from a carpetbagger image  his last-minute announcement that he would give up his Bundestag membership and Defense Ministry State Secretaryship to concentrate on Berlin has not helped. The CDU has been hovering at around 20 percent in polls since even before the campaign began.3. (C) CDU and SPD contacts agree that the turnout for the election will likely be very low. SPD Berlin Business Manager Ruediger Scholz fears this could hurt the SPD more than the CDU and so the party intends to focus on getting its core supporters to the polls in the final weeks of the campaign. Scholz points out that a low turnout is likely to benefit smaller parties with more ideological voters  meaning the far-left WASG and the far-right NPD and Republicans. He and most other interlocutors seem to expect that the far-right will win seats in the district assemblies in at least some of Berlin's eastern districts while the WASG could win seats in Kreuzberg-Friedrichshain. The threshold for entry is winning only three percent of district votes. Neither far-right nor far-left is given any chance of clearing the five percent threshold for entry into the state parliament.Coalition Politics-----------------4. (C) The Left Party.PDS, according to Berlin leader Klaus Lederer, cannot expect a repeat of its 23 percent performance in 2001. That showing was the result of the banking scandal, which briefly tarred the SPD as well as CDU, and the star quality of then-PDS lead candidate Gregor Gysi, now fully occupied in the Bundestag. Polls put the LP.PDS at around 15 percent, which is where the Greens also stand. Thus, either party could be a plausible partner for the SPD. Mayor Wowereit has stated his desire to remain in government with the LP.PDS, though the two parties have not concluded a formal electoral alliance. The SPD's Scholz, Green Berlin caucus leader Sibyll Klotz, and Berlin FDP leader Markus Loening all agree that the LP.PDS would make the more comfortable partner for Wowereit because of the ease of their cooperation thus far and because keeping the LP.PDS in government defuses a large bloc of voters who could be mobilized easily to protest the cuts and privatizations which the government has used to try and recover control of the budget. However, Scholz notes that it would probably be better for the city and for Wowereit given his political ambitions, if he were to form a coalition with the Greens, who are more centrist (especially on finance) and, at the federal level, presentable. Green state parliament member Oezcan Mutlu argued strongly that Wowereit will opt for the Greens based on these considerations, though he acknowledged that working with the Greens would be harder. He even said that, given Green fractiousness, they would have to bring a 7-8 seat majority into a coalition to make it stable.5. (C) If the numbers did not work out for a two-party coalition (and all our contacts reject the idea of a Grand Coalition), then the most likely option seems to be an SPD-LP.PDS-Green alliance. However, some in the FDP (now at 8-9 percent in polls) hope that in such a situation, they might have a chance of sidling into power. Berlin FDP lead candidate Martin Lindner and Loening have told us that they believe the Greens would rather work with them than the LP.PDS. This seems quite a long shot, though, as Berlin Greens stand quite far to the left in the Green spectrum.Comment-------6. (C) The Berlin election is unlikely to have major national significance under any circumstances. The Grand Coalition recognizes this and, unlike in the period before the spring elections in Baden-Wuerttemberg, Rhineland-Palatinate and Saxony-Anhalt, is not postponing debate on contentious issues. However, in two aspects the elections are noteworthy. First, a victory will boost Klaus Wowereit's chance of playing a greater role in the SPD nationally, especially as he is seen as a standard-bearer for the party left. Second, even very localized success by the far-right will provoke comment and a measure of consternation and signal that the particular problem posed by far-rightist ideologues in eastern Germany remains to be resolved. End Comment. KOENIG
S E C R E T BERLIN 000242  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  FOR S/ES-O, EUR AND L  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/06/2017 TAGS: KJUS PTER PREL PGOV GMSUBJECT: AL-MASRI CASE -- CHANCELLERY AWARE OF USG CONCERNS  REF: A. BERLIN 230       B. BERLIN 200  Classified By: DCM John M. Koenig for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (S/NF) In a February 6 discussion with German Deputy National Security Adviser Rolf Nikel, the DCM reiterated our strong concerns about the possible issuance of international arrest warrants in the al-Masri case.  The DCM noted that the reports in the German media of the discussion on the issue between the Secretary and FM Steinmeier in Washington were not accurate, in that the media reports suggest the USG was not troubled by developments in the al-Masri case.  The DCM emphasized that this was not the case and that issuance of international arrest warrants would have a negative impact on our bilateral relationship.  He reminded Nikel of the repercussions to U.S.-Italian bilateral relations in the wake of a similar move by Italian authorities last year.  2.  (S/NF) The DCM pointed out that our intention was not to threaten Germany, but rather to urge that the German Government weigh carefully at every step of the way the implications for relations with the U.S.  We of course recognized the independence of the German judiciary, but noted that a decision to issue international arrest warrants or extradition requests would require the concurrence of the German Federal Government, specifically the MFA and the Ministry of Justice (MOJ).  The DCM said our initial indications had been that the German federal authorities would not allow the warrants to be issued, but that subsequent contacts led us to believe this was not the case.  3.  (S/NF) Nikel also underscored the independence of the German judiciary, but confirmed that the MFA and MOJ would have a procedural role to play.  He said the case was subject to political, as well as judicial, scrutiny.  From a judicial standpoint, the facts are clear, and the Munich prosecutor has acted correctly.  Politically speaking, said Nikel, Germany would have to examine the implications for relations with the U.S.  At the same time, he noted our political differences about how the global war on terrorism should be waged, for example on the appropriateness of the Guantanamo facility and the alleged use of renditions.  4.  (S/NF) Nikel also cited intense pressure from the Bundestag and the German media.  The German federal Government must consider the "entire political context," said Nikel.  He assured the DCM that the Chancellery is well aware of the bilateral political implications of the case, but added that this case "will not be easy."  The Chancellery would nonetheless try to be as constructive as possible.  5.  (S/NF) The DCM pointed out that the USG would likewise have a difficult time in managing domestic political implications if international arrest warrants are issued.  He reiterated our concerns and expressed the hope that the Chancellery would keep us informed of further developments in the case, so as to avoid surprises.  Nikel undertook to do so, but reiterated that he could not, at this point "promise that everything will turn out well." TIMKEN JR
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BERLIN 000802  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/16/2022 TAGS: PREL PGOV ECUN EU GMSUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR ANGELA MERKEL IN WASHINGTON: GOALS FOR EUROPE, GOALS AT HOME  REF: BERLIN 747  Classified By: DCM John Koenig.  Reason: 1.4(b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary.  Angela Merkel arrives in Washington in an enviable position of political strength, both at home and in the EU.  However, she is conscious that her strength derives largely from the weakness of her counterparts and other factors beyond her control.  Achieving her goals for the EU - in the trans-Atlantic context these are focused on climate change and the Transatlantic Economic Initiative - will reinforce her position at home and in the EU, and serve as a springboard to success on the larger G-8 stage.  A success for Merkel is also a success for the U.S.  Even after the German EU Presidency, we will want the Atlanticist Merkel to remain a dominant force within the EU.  In Berlin, a successful summit will strengthen her and other trans-Atlanticists against those who favor a policy of vocal, public antagonism.  End Summary.  Leading in the EU; Muddling Through at Home -------------------------------------------  2. (C) Angela Merkel's role as Germany's and Europe's leader is undisputed.  No other leader of a large member state is politically fit enough to offer himself up as a leader.  Her leadership of the G-8 and Germany's intrinsic weight and economic recovery are further boosts.  At home, Merkel is not only riding high in opinion polls (70 percent popularity rating) and enjoying the benefits of leadership at a time of long-sought economic growth, but has also wrong-footed her coalition partner Social Democrats with reformist domestic social policies.  However, in both cases her apparent strength is not entirely of her own making, but derives in large part from her office, the weakness of her counterparts, or from other factors beyond her control.  She took the helm of the EU at a time when progress on the European project had largely come to a halt, when European institutions were unsure of how or in which direction to move, and (as noted) no alternative leaders were present. In Berlin, her coalition partner and rival, the Social Democrats (SPD), are dealing with weak leadership, a vacuum of ideas, and a challenge from the left.  3. (C) Merkel has responded to these similar circumstances with quite different tactics.  In the EU, she has asserted German and her personal leadership over the Council Secretariat, especially with respect to her goal of  SIPDIS developing a road map for furthering the EU constitution. She has sidelined Brussels by putting her own representatives on the road to discuss the constitution in other capitals and has weighed in personally as needed to find compromises that keep the constitutional project moving forward.  Likewise, she has vigorously pursued the Transatlantic Economic Initiative within the EU to remove regulatory barriers, and has pushed for agreement on the new EU climate change and energy initiatives.  She has not succeeded in all her undertakings -- prospects for a new EU Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Russia remain distant, for example.  Still, the view that we hear from Brussels is of vigorous and effective leadership.  In Berlin, Merkel is known for her reticence to engage in aggressive politics, preferring to stay in the background until the "correlation of forces" is clear and then engaging to nudge the debate in her preferred direction.  Though the SPD is weak, Merkel has been reluctant to push it hard.  Her strategy appears to be aimed at building and consolidating her own and her party's dominance with a view toward a clear victory in 2009 elections, rather than attempting to score victories now that could alienate significant voter groups.  Washington: What's In It for Merkel -----------------------------------  4. (C) We sum up Merkel's goal for the U.S.-EU Summit as being to achieve substantive progress in the U.S.-EU relationship for its own sake and to build a lasting foundation for her leadership in the EU and in Germany.  The substantive agenda is clear and we need not explore it in detail here.  It is focused on our political cooperation in key areas - climate change and energy security as well as the Transatlantic Economic Initiative.  We recognize that in these and other areas, European goals are not exactly aligned with our own.  Nonetheless, success in these areas, the former a key concern of European publics and the latter important to sustaining European growth, after a long period in which trans-Atlantic relations were dominated by negative headlines and exchanges focused on other regions, would prove Merkel's particular competence at succeeding in Europe's key external relationship.  After success in Washington, Merkel  BERLIN 00000802  002 OF 002   can count on maintaining her position in Europe against any incoming French President and UK Prime Minister-in-waiting Brown.  Success in Washington will also strengthen her hand in the follow-on summits with Russia, Canada, and Japan and sets the stage for success in G-8 summit deliberations on climate change.  5. (C) At home, a Summit success may enable Merkel to end the SPD's ability to use loud, public "principled" criticism of the U.S. as a winning tactic.  Gerhard Schroeder won the 2002 election with his public attacks on U.S. Iraq policy, but if Merkel brings home meaningful agreements -- especially on issues with domestic resonance such as climate change and trans-Atlantic economic cooperation -- she will have shown the German public that her policy of constructive engagement with the U.S. brings real benefits on issues of concern to it.  Foreign policy, especially trans-Atlantic relations, is one of the few areas where the SPD still enjoys greater public support than does the CDU/CSU.  Success in Washington may undercut the SPD on that theme, as the CDU/CSU has already undercut it on many domestic social themes.  A Note on Style ---------------  6. (C) Merkel is pushing for a Summit that is more than a predictable set-piece, quickly forgotten.  She looks for real decisions to be made during the Summit discussions.  This does more than just ensure that she has something important to do.  It emphasizes her personal commitment to restoring European-American relations and her belief in face-to-face engagement.  We recognize the difficulty of organizing discussions in this format, but believe we too stand to gain by such an approach.  What's In This for Washington -----------------------------  7. (C) Post has previously reported on Merkel's risk-averse approach to foreign policy.  We do not expect her to change her leadership style because of success in Washington.  The real benefits for the U.S. lie in how success will affect the public understanding of how Germany can best build a relationship with Washington and its view of the U.S., the changing of which is a frequent theme in conversations with German leaders and thinkers.  A successful Summit will also reinforce our message that the U.S. and EU are natural partners, closely bound by common interests.  As a cautious conservative in a difficult coalition, Merkel will not run great risks for the U.S.  But, if she can show the public that cooperation with the U.S. works, the effect will be to cut the risk she runs by cooperating with the U.S.  It is a more complex path to a closer and more effective relationship than we would perhaps like, but our observation of Merkel and our conversations with her advisors lead us to see it as the best path available. TIMKEN JR
S E C R E T BERLIN 000122  SIPDIS  NOFORN  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/29/2018 TAGS: PGOV PREL GMSUBJECT: WELCOME TO BERLIN  Classified By: DEPUTY CHIEF OF MISSION JOHN KOENIG FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D)  ------------------------------------------ Electoral Fever Puts Pressure on Coalition ------------------------------------------  1. (C) NSA Hadley:  Mission Germany looks forward to welcoming you to Berlin January 31 to February 1.  Germany is currently consumed by the aftermath of bitterly fought state elections that took place on January 27 in Hesse and Lower Saxony.  They are being seen as barometers for next year's nationwide vote.  Although the conservative Christian Democrats (CDU) won comfortably in Lower Saxony, the CDU suffered a major setback in Hesse, where CDU Minister-President Roland Koch ran a divisive election campaign that took his party from a commanding lead in early polls to a virtual tie with the Social Democratic party (SPD).  The country is also digesting the significance of the unexpected political gains by the (neo-Communist) Left Party and its entry into both Hesse and Lower Saxony parliaments. Over the next several weeks, state and national politicians will evaluate coalition options, none of which appear to please any of the major parties.  The CDU's poor showing in Hesse could energize its competitors and lead to further domestic partisanship, thereby complicating Chancellor Angela Merkel's goal of solidifying the political center in advance of the 2009 national elections.  On the other hand, the success of CDU Minister-President Christian Wulff's relatively low-key, centrist re-election campaign in Lower Saxony has been seen as a vindication of Merkel's domestic political strategy.  2. (C) The outcome of these two state elections, and that of the February 24 Hamburg elections, will likely reverberate in the day-to-day functioning of the CDU-SPD coalition. Already, Merkel's conservatives and Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier's Social Democrats resemble the proverbial couple that hated each other but stayed together for the sake of the children:  the lack of any other viable coalition options is what sustains the partnership between the CDU/CSU and the SPD at this point.  On key priorities like Afghanistan and Kosovo (and on certain aspects of Iran), the gap between Merkel and Steinmeier is not so wide, and cooperation with the U.S. has not been harmed by domestic politics.  Differences are becoming more evident on some foreign policy issues however:  Steinmeier's January 17 meeting with Syrian Foreign Minister Muallem, over strong opposition from the Chancellery, is just the latest example. Increasingly, Christoph Heusgen and the Chancellery's small staff are being blindsided by the Foreign Ministry on policy matters that are significant but outside the spotlight. Overall, we can expect Merkel's government to be more hamstrung by partisan and interagency rivalries between now and the fall of 2009 than was the case in its first two years in office.  ------------------------------------ Steinmeier's Evolving Political Role ------------------------------------  3. (C) Steinmeier, who came to office with a reputation as a technocrat, is increasingly a political rival to the Chancellor.  Like most of his predecessors, he has benefited from the visibility conferred on the Foreign Minister.  He has become the most popular SPD politician in Germany and the second most popular overall, trailing only Merkel.  He recently was named Vice Chancellor, was elected as one of three national deputy chairmen of the SPD, and announced he will run for a federal parliament seat in 2009.  Steinmeier is regarded, both within the SPD and among the general public, as an attractive possible chancellor candidate in 2009, should SPD Chairman Kurt Beck stumble.  4. (C) With Steinmeier's evolution from technocrat to political leader, he must cultivate much greater rank-and-file support within the SPD.  This is a particular challenge for him, because on domestic issues he is seen as relatively conservative.  He was a key architect of Gerhard Schroeder's economic reforms and stood by with a studied detachment as Kurt Beck and the SPD's left wing began to roll them back last fall.  This is all the more reason for Steinmeier to seek out foreign policy issues like arms control and disarmament on which he can strike chords that resonate with SPD voters (regardless of the shortcomings we find in these ideas).  Similarly, in policy toward Russia, the former Soviet republics, and the Middle East, Steinmeier misses no opportunity to evoke the legacy of Willy Brandt, elevating dialog and economic engagement above open expression of disagreement as tools of diplomacy.  5. (C) These internal factors amplify the tendency of Steinmeier and his Foreign Office to pursue initiatives not in harmony with the Chancellor's instincts or policy preferences.  Germany has a weak foreign policy coordination process and the German constitution grants broad autonomy to ministers.  Therefore, the ability of the Chancellor and her staff to rein in the Foreign Office is limited.  A result is that Germany does not always speak with a single, clear voice.  --------------------------------------------- IRAN: Importance of International Cooperation ---------------------------------------------  6. (S) Although Merkel and the Chancellery have more consistently toed our common firm line on Iran, both the Chancellery and the Foreign Office are firmly committed to securing a third UNSCR sanctions resolution as a basis for more biting EU autonomous measures.  MFA officials called the January 22 P5 1 Ministerial a success in demonstrating unity among the members, both by producing a new UNSC resolution text and by showing a unified strategic approach in dealing with Iran.  MFA officials have told us in private that EU autonomous sanctions would not be discussed at the January 28-29 GAERC.  In conversations prior to January 22, German officials have emphasized the importance of the broadest possible international coalition, and thus highly value efforts to keep all members of the P5-plus-1 on board, deploying this argument when approached about either unilateral or EU autonomous measures.  However, they point to pressures from their business community (as well as from the Finance and Economics Ministries) as constraints on adopting stronger unilateral action against the Iranian regime. Privately, senior officials in the Chancellery and Foreign Office have expressed frustration that the NIE has complicated international diplomatic efforts.  On December 4, FM Steinmeier said the NIE on Iran offered the chance "inject new momentum" into the nuclear negotiations and called on all sides not to squander this opportunity.  Merkel said publicly on January 15 that the NIE had slowed the momentum behind further UN sanctions; she simultaneously underscored the seriousness of Iran's nuclear activities and the need for international solidarity.  ---------------------------------------- AFGHANISTAN: Need for Broader Deployment ----------------------------------------  7. (C) Encouraging greater German involvement in Afghanistan is a key priority of Mission Germany; we have made some progress, but the Germans remain very reluctant about deploying combat forces outside of the North.  In advance of the April NATO Summit, Germany will increase its involvement in the training of the Afghan National Army and will probably agree to take over responsibility for the 150-man quick reaction force (QRF) in the north.  We should welcome the QRF decision, because it would represent the first German ISAF contingent deployable on short notice (including possibly in exceptional and temporary circumstances outside the north), which would be a qualitatively new and significant step toward greater involvement in kinetic operations.  Secretary Gates' recent written request to Defense Minister Jung to deploy German Special Operations Forces (SOF) under ISAF in the south of Afghanistan is likely to be very controversial here, but may prove acceptable in the end if, in return, we were to offer Germany the option of ending its current offer of SOF for OEF.  Moving the German SOF commitment from OEF to ISAF would also have the benefit of allowing us to shift the considerable diplomatic resources and attention we devoted last fall to getting the German OEF mandate renewed to activities that may yield more practical benefits, such as pressing Germany to increase its contributions to ISAF.  8. (C) We should encourage greater German leadership in the EUPOL effort to train Afghanistan's civilian police force. EUPOL is led by German Juergen Scholz, and Germany contributes more police trainers than any other EU country, but the program has been slow to start and the planned ceiling of 195 EU police trainers is inadequate for the job. Furthermore, activities are not currently planned at the district level where the need is greatest.  Germany should be urged to accelerate the deployment of EU trainers to Afghanistan, increase the number of trainers, and broaden the geographic range of activities.  ------------------------ RUSSIA: Split Approaches ------------------------  9. (C) There are significant differences between the Chancellery and the Foreign Office on Russia, which invites Russian wedge-driving.  Merkel has never shied away from plain talk about disturbing trends inside Russia.  Steinmeier was the first foreign visitor to get a meeting with presidential candidate Medvedev after his nomination (a meeting with President Putin was thrown in as well).  Lately, the combination of Russian CFE suspension, backsliding on democracy, and intransigence on Kosovo has pushed even some in the SPD to offer criticism.  Still, the Foreign Ministry will likely continue to seek an unhelpful bridging role with Russia, in particular on CFE and other matters related to arms control.  The Chancellery can help constrain these impulses, but we will also need to keep up pressure among the Quad partners as well as from other key allies (e.g. Turkey and Norway) to make clear that German unilateral initiatives put transatlantic solidarity at risk.  ------------------------- KOSOVO: Close Cooperation -------------------------  10. (C) We discern very little daylight between the Chancellor and Steinmeier on Kosovo, and there is keen interest in working closely with the U.S. to resolve status and seal the EU's leadership role.  While the Bundestag will engage in intensive debate following an anticipated coordinated declaration of independence, we expect the multiparty consensus in favor of independence and the KFOR and ESDP missions to hold.  ------------------------------------- COUNTERTERRORISM: Building on Success -------------------------------------  11. (C) Your visit comes at a time when U.S.-German bilateral cooperation on security issues is as close as it has ever been.  The successful cooperation surrounding the September 4 arrests of three individuals planning large-scale attacks and the upcoming conclusion of a new bilateral agreement on fingerprint, DNA and other data sharing are the latest evidence of this trend.  Furthermore, no German senior official pushes as hard, or argues so publicly, for closer bilateral cooperation on security issues as Interior Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble.  Should the opportunity arise, you should inform German officials that we are eager to build on our successful record of counterterrorism cooperation and explore how we might work together to address threats such as European residents who seek terrorist training at overseas camps and become jihadists in Iraq or Afghanistan.  ---------------------------- ECONOMICS: Commitment to TEC ----------------------------  12. (C) Merkel highly values the U.S.-EU Transatlantic Economic Council (TEC) -- a centerpiece of her 2007 EU presidency -- aimed at reducing regulatory barriers to transatlantic trade and investment.  She is concerned, however, about maintaining the momentum in the TEC and fears that the European Commission and future EU presidencies (including France) may lose enthusiasm for the project. German officials also worry that a changing U.S. Administration could derail what they regard as a highly successful new transatlantic economic instrument; we should emphasize our continued commitment to the TEC, and encourage the Germans to maintain a leading role in it.  The German economy is expected to grow at only 1.7 percent this year. Previous higher estimates were lowered due to rising oil prices, the strength of the Euro, slower U.S. growth, and continuing turmoil in financial markets.  German economists and business leaders are also worried about the possibility of a national minimum wage as well as increased labor union demands for wage increases, both of which could affect the economy adversely.  Merkel plans to highlight employment gains -- as opposed to minimum wages -- as the focus of her economic plan looking ahead to the 2009 national elections.  ----------------------------------- CLIMATE CHANGE: Aggressive Measures -----------------------------------  13. (C) Chancellor Merkel and the rest of Germany's political leadership remain serious about pursuing aggressive international measures to meet the challenges of global warming.  Merkel has made climate change a priority of her Chancellorship and enjoys the overwhelming domestic support on this.  Merkel's support for mandatory, targeted global limits on greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and an international cap-and-trade regime reflects a deep-seated belief that only drastic, concerted efforts on the part of the international community can slow -- and ultimately reverse -- the human contribution to global warming.  If anything, Steinmeier supports tougher standards.  While the Germans have been willing to consider alternative solutions, such as new technologies for clean coal and renewables, fundamental differences in our approaches to the issue of climate change remain, and could lead to more public disagreement in the future.  For example, while Germany will send a delegation to the January 30 Major Economies Meeting (MEM), the German Government remains skeptical about the value that the Major Economies Process (MEP) adds to the UNFCCC track. The Germans are particularly concerned about the need to avoid duplication of effort in the various other climate change-related forums, including the UNFCCC and the G-8. TIMKEN JR
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BERLIN 000531  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/25/2018 TAGS: PGOV PREL GMSUBJECT: GERMAN GRAND COALITION FACES STRAIN OF UPCOMING 2009 ELECTIONS  REF: A. BERLIN 313      B. 07 BERLIN 0674  Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission John Koenig for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  ------- Summary -------  1. (C)  The German Grand Coalition will increasingly face tensions created by the need for the lead candidates to position themselves for the 2009 national electoral campaign.  Chancellor Angela Merkel and Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier both remain highly popular.  Merkel, however, faces political risks if the economy turns for the worse.  In the second half of this year, as the Social Democratic Party (SPD) moves closer to a decision about its chancellor candidate, potential candidate Steinmeier will likely face scrutiny and criticism from his own party's left-wing.  It is too early to predict the likely coalition outcome in 2009 -- although Merkel's Christian Democrats (CDU) and the Christian Social Union (CSU) are likely to come out ahead, they may not have a better coalition option than continuing the current Grand Coalition with the SPD.  U.S. foreign policy is not likely to play a central role in the campaign leading up to Germany's national elections in fall 2009.  Improved U.S.-German relations under Merkel and German fascination with the vibrant democratic process in the U.S. primary elections have played significant roles in improving German attitudes towards the U.S., thereby dampening the likelihood that the SPD will use anti-American rhetoric to rally voters as former chancellor Gerhard Schroeder did in 2002.  End summary.  --------------------------------------------- Merkel's Possible Archilles Heel: The Economy ---------------------------------------------  2. (U) Chancellor Angela Merkel (CDU) remains highly popular among Germans, who view her as an effective leader with a strong international stature.  Her approval rating is 71 percent.  In large part due to Merkel's popularity, the CDU has held a commanding 8- to 14-point lead over the SPD in polls over the last year.  3. (C) Although Merkel's high popularity is expected to continue, she faces diffuse risks on economic issues.  CDU parliamentarians suggest that an economic downturn would be the principal threat to Merkel's high popularity  Economic forecasts currently favor Merkel, with projections of 1.6 to 1.8 percent growth for this year (though slightly lower for 2009), but with no real evidence of recession despite the global slowdown.  4. (C) Among CDU leaders there is a sense that the CDU may have peaked (perhaps too early) and that caution is the watchword.  Merkel, who campaigned in 2005 on a program of economic liberalization and watched a commanding lead in the polls nearly vanish during the campaign, appears to be moving toward the political center in an attempt to expand her base and consolidate centrist support that the SPD is losing because of its leftward shift.  She is demonstrating ever-greater focus on domestic policy and espousing popular middle class enticements such as pension increases, a longer duration of unemployment benefits for older workers, and enhancement of nursing care insurance.  While many consider this move to be politically smart, some on the CDU's right-wing have criticized the Chancellor for abandoning core CDU values.  --------------------------------------------- ----- Steinmeier Could Get Roughed Up by SPD's Left Wing --------------------------------------------- -----  5. (C) Social Democrats have speculated in recent months that SPD Chairman Kurt Beck will eventually defer to the much more popular Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier as the party's eventual chancellor candidate (ref A).  SPD insiders consider this a 50-50 proposition.  Kurt Beck's recent victory in guiding competing factions of the SPD to agreement on privatization of the railway monopoly Deutsche Bahn may help shore up his position (septel).  It is uncertain whether Steinmeier would choose to accept the SPD nomination at a time when the SPD is hovering in the mid 20's in the polls and its electoral prospects seem poor.  Note: In any case, Steinmeier will run for political office, a federal parliament seat from Brandenburg City, for the first time in 2009.  End note.  6. (C) Steinmeier would face some detractors in his own  BERLIN 00000531  002 OF 002   party.  Deputy SPD Chair Andrea Nahles, the leading left-wing critic of Steinmeier's centrist approach, told Political M/C that she was unhappy that "the U.S. knows more about Steinmeier than I do," referring to Steinmeier's role as Chancellery Chief of Staff and Intelligence Coordinator under Gerhard Schroeder.  Nahles suggested strongly that the left wing of the SPD could portray Steinmeier as too close to the U.S. on intelligence-related issues, especially his role in the Murat Kurnaz affair (ref B), thereby damaging his candidacy.  7. (C) Nahles admitted, however, that the SPD likely would do better at the polls with Steinmeier as chancellor candidate (between 30 and 35 percent of the vote).  This would mean more SPD parliamentarians holding onto their seats -- a consideration that could have an effect on the SPD's choice. Nahles added that Steinmeier "has little experience in managing the party, but he's a fast learner."  ---------------------------------- Grand Coalition Fated to Continue? ----------------------------------  8. (C) Deputy CDU national chairman and Lower Saxony Minister-President Christian Wulff (CDU) told the DCM that another grand coalition is the most likely outcome in 2009 if the political landscape does not change significantly in the coming months.  The SPD's Nahles agrees.  While Merkel and the CDU still prefer to govern with the Free Democrats (FDP), the numbers may not suffice for a majority.  Although experiments such as the CDU-Greens coalition in Hamburg are enticing, replicating them at the national level remains difficult.  9. (C) Comment:  The CDU's fear of opening up its flanks to SPD attacks -- and the SPD's self-obsession during a period of turmoil in the party -- reveal a degree of caution on policy issues that is remarkable even by German standards. This is reflected in German caution on foreign policy issues of interest to us such as Afghanistan and Iran.  A particular USG concern is whether the SPD or others will try to employ anti-American rhetoric to curry voter support, much as former chancellor Gerhard Schroeder did in 2002.  Even SPD left-wingers like Nahles tell us, however, that foreign policy is not as great a consideration for German voters as it was around the time of the Iraq war, and therefore will not likely be a decisive factor in next year's national elections.  It is also important to note that German attitudes towards the U.S. have improved over the past year due to our improved bilateral relations and German fascination with democracy on display in the U.S. primary elections.  The current improvement is evidenced by a recent Harris poll which showed a dramatic 21 percentage-point increase in the number of Germans who regard the U.S. as a trustworthy partner.  Also, the German federal election campaign will occur during what is expected here to be an extended popular "honeymoon" for the new U.S. administration.  Consequently, German politicians might perceive less political advantage in a critical stance toward the U.S.  End comment. TIMKEN JR
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BERLIN 001106SIPDISE.O. 12958: DECL: 09/09/2019TAGS: GM PREL PGOVSUBJECT: CHANCELLOR ANGELA "TEFLON" MERKEL TAKES LIMELIGHTAS FDP WAITS IN THE WINGSClassified By: MINISTER COUNSELOR FOR POLITICAL AFFAIRS GEORGE GLASS FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D)SUMMARY -------1. (C) Less than two weeks after her party suffered lossesin two state elections, CDU Chancellor Angela Merkel foundher fighting spirit before 8,000 party faithful at aSeptember 6 election rally in Duesseldorf launching the "hotphase" of the CDU/CSU electoral campaign. The CDU has beenshifting party tactics after its losses in the August 30elections in Saarland and Thuringia, where the SocialDemocratic Party (SPD) may now be in a position to formcoalitions with the Left Party. Merkel -- to great applause-- focused in on the specter of a so-called red-redgovernment composed of the SPD and The Left Party. Shedescribed the SPD as suffering from an "identity crisis," andneeding a vacation from political decision-making and time inopposition. Along with the entire CDU leadership andincumbent CDU/CSU Ministers-president, Merkel made her casefor a CDU/CSU coalition with the pro-business but sociallyliberal FDP. She repeated the CDU/CSU's election mantra: "wehave the strength" throughout her speech, aiming to convincethe German electorate that a strong CDU/CSU is required forGermany to emerge from its worst economic recession inpost-war history. CDU views on whether the issue ofGermany's role in Afghanistan would become a more prominentcampaign theme were mixed.2. (C) With three weeks to go before the parliamentaryelections, all signs point to Chancellor Merkel returning tooffice, although she and her party recognize that they face adifficult campaign. It remains uncertain whether the CDU andthe FDP will gain enough support to form a majoritycoalition. If not, another Grand Coalition (CDU/CSU-SPD) isvery likely; other options require a three-partyconstellation that would force the ill-suited Greens and FDPto work together. But, there seems to be an almost onehundred percent certainty -- given the SPD's chronic slump inthe polls and limited coalition options -- that SPD ForeignMinister and Chancellor-candidate Frank Walter Steinmeierwill not become Chancellor. End summary.MERKEL CASTS ASIDE SPD, EMBRACES FDP ------------------------------------3. (C) Chancellor Merkel -- to rapturous cries of "Angie,Angie" and a standing ovation -- took to the floor at herparty's September 6 rally before some 8,000 supportersaffirming that the CDU/CSU "have the best chance to win theparliamentary elections" but also cautioning that "theelection's outcome has not yet been decided." On the onehand, she praised her Grand Coalition government's record,noting its success in countering Germany's economic andfinancial crisis. On the other hand, she called for a newCDU/CSU coalition with the FDP after the upcoming elections--casting aside the SPD. She asserted that such a coalitionwould anchor Germany in the "middle" of the politicalspectrum and take the country out of its current economiccrisis faster. Merkel said: "Our country needs a governmentthat will support growth, security and work for everyone."In a swipe at the SPD (COMMENT: Merkel never mentionedSteinmeier by name. END COMMENT.), she said the party iscurrently plagued by an "identity crisis," adding that, "TheSPD is devoid of any reality and is distraught." She asked,"How can a party that achieved 10, 18, and 24 percent at therecent state elections in Saxony, Thuringia, and Saarland betaken seriously?" Dismissing SPD warnings against aso-called "black-yellow" (CDU/CSU-FDP) coalition, Merkel saidthat the country should be more worried about the SPD's plansto form coalitions with The Left Party on the state andfederal levels. (Note: The SPD has warned that ablack-yellow coalition would represent wealthy Germany andbusiness interest at the expense of the middle and lowerclasses.)4. (U) CDU leaders also tried to cast the CDU at the statelevel in a positive light after its poor showing in theSaarland and Thuringia state elections on August, causing theMinister President of the latter state to resign. LowerSaxony's CDU Minister President Christian Wulff asserted thatthe most prosperous and successful "Laender" (states) inGermany are those ruled by the CDU/CSU and FDP. He citedBerlin, governed by SPD Mayor Klaus Wowereit's Berlin (NOTE:in Berlin the SPD rules with The Left Party. END NOTE), asbeing the worst case. Hesse's Minister President Roland Koch-- to great applause -- noted that he could not understandhow the SPD could possibly cooperate on a state or nationallevel with a Left Party that is "anti-American andanti-European." (Note: In Saarland and Thuringia the optionBERLIN 00001106 002 OF 003 exists for the SPD to form a governing coalition with theLeft Party. END NOTE.)CSU Truce with FDP?-------------------5. (C) CSU Bavarian Minister-President Horst Seehofer threwhis party's support behind a CDU/CSU coalition with the FDP,despite his well-publicized doubts about the FDP's realcoalition intentions after the parliamentary elections. Evenas Seehofer pronounced his support for the FDP inDuesseldorf, however, media reports from Munich confirmedthat the CSU had decided to continue attacking the FDP. TheCSU has been buffing its economic bona fides by attacking theFDP on its own themes while basking in the reflected gloryfrom popular Economics Minister zu Guttenberg, the new CSUchampion. Seehofer has publicly suspected that FDP ChairmanGuido Westerwelle -- in an attempt to enter government at allcosts -- might support a "traffic light" coalition with theSPD and the Greens, although this political constellationappears unlikely at present. In addition, Bavarian politicstrump national politics, especially during a time when theCSU longs for the days when their party alone wieldedpolitical power in Munich, rather than as it does today, in acoalition with the FDP. Seehofer is also aware that the CSUneeds to be strong and the FDP proportionally more weak forthe CSU to win more and better ministerial posts in aCDU/CSU-FDP coalition. He did not use his appearance inDuesseldorf to chide the FDP, to the great delight of thosepleading that recent CDU/CSU-FDP bickering had been harmfuland counter-productive during the campaign.AFGHANISTAN - A DOMESTIC CAMPAIGN ISSUE? ----------------------------------------6. (C) The September 4 air strike against two fuel tankersnear Kunduz, Afghanistan hit the press right before theCDU/CSU rally. In light of the German media's frenzy, PolOffasked the CDU's Head of International Relations KlemensMoemkes whether Germany's ISAF commitment might emerge as apotential domestic campaign issue. Moemkes noted that theSPD could make Afghanistan an issue but this would be veryodd given Foreign Minister Steinmeier's support for Germany'smilitary role in ISAF. However, the prospect of Afghanistanbecoming a major theme clearly had the CDU's xxxxxspooked. He told PolOff that it would be very difficult forthe Chancellor not to address Germany's role in Afghanistanin the coming weeks. Given the German public's overwhelmingsupport for a withdrawal of German troops from Afghanistan,this was not an issue the Chancellor wanted to address in therun-up to the parliamentary elections.COMMENT -------7. (C) While it is all but certain that Chancellor Merkelwill return to office as Chancellor after the nextparliamentary elections on September 27, it is too close tocall whether she will achieve a coalition with the FDP.Bavarian MP Seehofer's attacks on the FDP in Bavaria couldweaken that party there and further undermine the chances ofa coalition. The FDP wants the same but political bickeringover future ministerial positions and CSU attacks on the FDPin Bavaria and on FDP Chairman Guido Westerwelle suggest thata possible CDU/CSU-FDP coalition will not be a marriage madein heaven. Some FDP contacts admit that they harbor doubtsabout the Chancellor's promise to form a coalition with theFDP. They insinuate that in reality she may prefer anotherGrand Coalition with the SPD, although Chancellor Merkel hasused every public opportunity to advertise for a CDU/CSU-FDPcoalition. Backing down on this pledge would call intoquestion her reputation.8. (C) Paradoxically, however, it is the CDU/CSU's relativeweakness in the polls (35-36 percent) that threatens apossible CDU/CSU-FDP coalition. The FDP is clearly riding ona high with double-digit successes in the state elections ofSaarland, Saxony, and Thuringia, but this may not be enough.The CDU refuses to engage in any self-introspection after itsdefeats in Saarland and Thuringia and the party can reallyonly take comfort from the SPD's perennial weakness. Thefear in the CDU is acute that the Chancellor's highpopularity ratings may not be enough to ensure a comfortablewin for the CDU/CSU at the parliamentary elections.9. (C) Merkel, once again, vehemently denies any intentionto form a Grand Coalition with the SPD but the electoral mathon September 27 may force her -- despite intense CDU/CSUreservations, not to mention those of the German public -- tolook at the SPD as a partner. As for the SPD, Steinmeier isBERLIN 00001106 003 OF 003 looking desperate. The SPD has failed to reach over 25percent in the last six elections and Steinmeier's unlikelypath to the chancellorship is only possible if he reneges ona campaign promise not to form a coalition with The LeftParty. This will not happen in 2009 but the CDU/CSU will nottire of raising the fear of a red-red coalition in 2009 or in2013. The Chancellor appears to be in a win-win situationbut three weeks on the campaign trail can be an eternity.End comment.Murphy
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BERLIN 001162  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/14/2019 TAGS: PGOV PREL GMSUBJECT: GERMANY'S NEXT FOREIGN MINISTER?: THE WORLD ACCORDING TO FDP CHAIRMAN GUIDO WESTERWELLE  REF: BERLIN 594  Classified By: MINISTER-COUNSELOR FOR POLITICAL AFFAIRS GEORGE GLASS FO R REASONS 1.4 (B) and (D)  SUMMARY -------  1.  (C//NF) Free Democratic Party (FDP) Chairman Guido Westerwelle may be on the verge of becoming Foreign Minister and Vice-Chancellor in a Christian Democratic Union (CDU)/Christian Social Union (CSU)-FDP government after the parliamentary elections on September 27.  He has a strong craving for political power and recognition after spending eleven years in opposition.  Westerwelle previewed his foreign and security policy objectives and views in a major speech at the German Council on Foreign Relations (DGAP) on May 4, a speech for which the media nicknamed him "Guido Genscher," playing on Westerwelle's ideological leanings and close relationship with former FDP Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher.  2.  (C//NF) Westerwelle's DGAP remarks provided us with a glimpse of Westerwellian thought.  They were short on substance, suggesting that Westerwelle's command of complex foreign and security policy issues still requires deepening if he is to successfully represent German interests on the world stage (see REFTEL).  While he is a Transatlanticist, Westerwelle questions the breadth of U.S. power and U.S. calls for stronger German engagement.  He also harbors resentment that he has not been taken more seriously by the Washington political establishment.  (NOTE: Embassy will report SEPTEL on more detailed foreign policy implications for the U.S. of a Westerwelle-led MFA).  END SUMMARY.  WESTERWELLE'S FOREIGN POLICY PRIORITIES ---------------------------------------  3.  (C) Westerwelle's most important foreign policy priorities will be focused on global disarmament and arms control.  In remarks in Schwerin on September 17, Westerwelle called again for the removal of all U.S. tactical nuclear weapons -- within the context of negotiations with NATO -- from German soil.  He was very critical of the Bush Administration's Missile Defense plans but was quick to praise President Obama's recent announcement on Missile Defense, saying "this move created additional international confidence."  Westerwelle remains a committed Transatlanticist but he has been consistently cautious of committing German troops to out-of-area deployments. Afghanistan was the exception.  Westerwelle continues to support Germany's ISAF mandate, but he has also indicated that the FDP wants to bring German troops home from Afghanistan as soon as possible provided the mission has been successfully completed.  Westerwelle and the FDP support close engagement with Russia and see it as a "strategic partner.  Westerwelle has pursued close ties with Russia's leadership during his eleven years in opposition.  On Iran, Westerwelle has talked about the need for dialogue but his party's pro-business orientation makes him particularly skeptical of sanctions and resistant to unilateral efforts to cut back trade.  THE UNLIKELY FOREIGN MINISTER -----------------------------  4.  (C//NF) By his own admission, Westerwelle has never seriously harbored a fascination for international affairs. FDP Bundestag member Marina Schuster told PolOff recently that foreign policy is not Westerwelle's "true love," but that he will take this position due to its high profile and as it is tied to the position of Vice-Chancellor.  FDP contacts tell us that he plans to remain a foreign policy generalist, which suggests he will have plenty of time to wax lyrical on domestic politics - to the potential detriment of political harmony in a possible future CDU/CSU-FDP coalition.  He also finds very appealing the prospect of being one of the only cabinet members besides the chancellor who can choose his media advisors, which suggests that Westerwelle will continue to place great emphasis on cultivating his public image.  5.  (C//NF) There is a contrast between Westerwelle's increased public support and successful leadership of the FDP versus the continued skepticism, often bordering on contempt, shown by much of the German foreign policy elite toward him. Opinion polls show that Westerwelle's public image has improved substantially in the last year in particular. But, as one well known foreign policy analyst in Berlin told PolOff, he lacks the gravitas and is seen as too  BERLIN 00001162  002 OF 004   opportunistic to be trusted as foreign minister.  At the conclusion of his DGAP speech, several MFA desk officers remarked to PolOff that they were not yet persuaded that Westerwelle had the "foreign and security policy expertise necessary" to become a successful Foreign Minister, although they had no doubts about his ability to get up to speed quickly.  There was a consensus among desk officers -- driven, perhaps, by political bias -- that Westerwelle was arrogant and too fixated on maintaining his "cult of personality."  Negative reaction to his DGAP speech reflects the foreign policy community's skepticism of Westerwelle.  HE'S NO GENSCHER ----------------  6.  (C//NF) Like Dan Quayle in 1992, Westerwelle wants to compare himself to his mentor, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, but in the eyes of the foreign policy community, he is no Genscher. Nevertheless, Westerwelle's world-views have to a large extent been shaped by "Genscherism."  British academic Timothy Garton Ash described "Genscherism" as an attempt "to maintain and improve Germany's ties with a wide range of states, which were themselves pursuing quite different and quite contrary objectives.  This complex balancing act involved saying somewhat different things in different places."  Genscherism also embraced a foreign policy "culture of restraint," while emphasizing the models of "cooperation" and "continuity" in German foreign policy, which Westerwelle discussed in his May 4 speech at the DGAP.  Genscher's "culture of restraint" had a profound influence on Westerwelle's thinking, thus making him very skeptical about committing Germany's armed forces to overseas military operations  (NOTE: Afghanistan was an exception, although with the caveat that Germany's area of responsibility there would remain limited to the north and would concentrate on police training and civil reconstruction efforts (SEPTEL). END NOTE).  A TRANSATLANTICIST WITH A TWIST -------------------------------  7.  (C//NF) At the June 30 meeting, Westerwelle quickly confirmed his Transatlanticist credentials.  Westerwelle's views on the United States' role in the world, however, also defines his brand of Transatlanticism.  According to Westerwelle's political biographer Majid Sattar, Westerwelle has never been able to shake his skepticism about how the United States wields power in the world.  Citing an exchange with former U.S. Ambassador to Germany Richard Burt (1985-1989), Sattar recalls how Westerwelle forcefully intervened in a discussion the Ambassador was having on U.S. foreign policy during the Cold War to say: "But you are not the police of the world."  Sattar comments further that Westerwelle was immune to any "transatlantic brainwashing." Although Westerwelle used his DGAP speech to criticize the United States under the Bush Administration for its excessive focus on the War on Terror and unilateralism, saying that the United States had lost its compass more than once, Westerwelle quickly changed his tune when he talked about the positive impact that President Obama has had on U.S. foreign policy since his election.  8.  (C//NF) Westerwelle also made clear that he believes Germany needs to be more engaged in U.S. policy-making.  He criticized Chancellor Merkel for not having been more engaged with Washington on issues of mutual interest, especially arms control, when Washington has been engaged in extensive policy reviews.  He suggested that the FDP would quickly fill the vacuum should they enter government.  WESTERWELLE TO WASHINGTON: WHAT ABOUT ME? -----------------------------------------  9.  (C//NF) Westerwelle has found it hard to conceal his resentment toward Washington based on his feeling that neither its top leadership nor the Embassy in Berlin had courted him during his time in opposition.  At a June 30 meeting between the former CDA and Westerwelle, he criticized the Bush Administration for its failure to seek a political dialogue with him.  Also revealing was Westerwelle's slight edge on his sense of humor, first charming us by inquiring about Secretary Clinton's health after her elbow injury and next joking that he would ask the Secretary if the Embassy had conveyed his best wishes.  10.  (C//NF) Partially due to his insistence on only high-level meetings in Washington (and therefore limited contact), Westerwelle remains a relatively unknown political figure in the U.S., although he has traveled there many times.  Unlike his future potential cabinet colleague,  BERLIN 00001162  003 OF 004   Christian Social Union (CSU) Economics Minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg, Westerwelle has little professional experience in the United States since he never made extensive efforts to introduce himself to the Washington policy community. Unfortunately, our attempts to reach out to Westerwelle were often rebuffed with the excuse that he would only meet the Ambassador.  Only after extensive Embassy negotiations with Westerwelle's staff were former CDA and PolOff able to secure the June 30 meeting.  COMMENT -------  11.  (C//NF) One week before the parliamentary elections, polls indicate that Westerwelle stands a good chance of becoming Germany's next foreign minister, a position he has been preparing for since 2002.  If Westerwelle becomes Foreign Minister, we can expect tough love diplomacy from someone who prides himself in being our "close" friend, but who in reality remains skeptical about the U.S. and its foreign policy objectives.  Westerwelle will be a friend, but he will not hesitate to criticize us if vital German interests are at stake or being challenged.  Westerwelle's prickliness toward the United States would likely be neutralized by the long-sought attention from Washington he would receive if he becomes foreign minister.  Germany's foreign policy elite will continue to view him with skepticism.  The factor that assuages some of this concern, however, is that no one expects him to be able to match Chancellor Merkel if he does become Foreign Minister, and policy experts tell us that foreign policy influence is likely to shift even further to the Chancellery.  END COMMENT.  BIO NOTES ---------  12.  (U) Dr. Guido Westerwelle was born on December 27, 1961 in Bad Honnef (near Bonn) to Dr. Heinrich and Erika Westerwelle.  Family members note that Westerwelle inherited the unbridled, aggressive temperament of his father and the calculated, deliberate, and hesitant cleverness of his mother.  His parents divorced when he was 8 years old, which according to Westerwelle himself, left a scar on his educational and physical development.  After the divorce, Westerwelle was raised by his father -- a lawyer -- and he maintained a close relationship with his mother, also a career lawyer, who lived nearby.  Stefan and Henrik, Guido's half brothers, one from each of his parents' previous relationships, were older and soon left the house to live on their own.  Westerwelle grew up with his younger brother Kai; they were very similar and both were considered active extroverts who enjoyed debates.  Westerwelle enjoys horses and to this day he is an avid equestrian.  13.  (SBU) Westerwelle is openly gay.  He has said that this was not a problem at home since he was raised to be self-confident and his family was very liberal.  In addition, Bonn, where Westerwelle went to university was a liberal town.  Westerwelle officially came out rather quietly in the political world in 2005 at Merkel's 50th birthday party when he brought his partner, Michael Mronz, a sports manager, to the party.  Mronz is currently a steering board member of the 2009 Berlin World Track and Field World Championships. Ironically, Westerwelle is conservative on gay rights.  He is keen to protect the special status of marriages and families under German law.  He opposes adoption by same sex couples but says that he wishes he could have children.  14.  (U) Westerwelle developed an early taste for politics, being the editor of his high school newspaper.  He caused a school controversy when he named teachers who he felt did not respect students who had transferred into the secondary high school system from the grammar school system.  As a result of his story, many teachers developed a dislike for Westerwelle.  He further developed his political thinking when he attended an event with Hans-Dietrich Genscher and Otto Graf Lambsdorff during the 1980 parliamentary elections.  It was at that time that he decided to join the FDP and form an FDP youth group in Bonn.  Westerwelle eventually became a lawyer but his younger brother Kai once said he had the impression that being a lawyer was never his brother's real goal.  His understanding of the media and their use for his own political purposes is envied by many politicians.  He takes a pro-active approach to overseeing his party's media operations.  In front of the camera, Westerwelle comes across as serious, sharp, and calculating, and almost comical at times with what is perceived as a very exaggerated presence. In person, people say Westerwelle is very gallant, funny, and sarcastic.   BERLIN 00001162  004 OF 004   15.  (U)  In his free time, Westerwelle enjoys attending concerts and reading.  He enjoys running, beach volleyball, sailing, horseback riding, and mountain biking.  He collects paintings from New Leipzig School artists such as Neo Rauch and Tim Eitel and is a fond collector of works by Norbert Bisky and Joerg Immendorff.  He enjoys vacationing in Italy and Spain. Murphy
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BERLIN 001167  SIPDIS  STATE FOR EUR, L, S/CT  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/17/2019 TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER KJUS KHLS GMSUBJECT: DATA PRIVACY TRUMPS SECURITY: IMPLICATIONS OF A FDP VICTORY ON COUNTERTERRORISM COOPERATION  REF: A. BERLIN 988      B. 2008 BERLIN 504      C. 2008 BERLIN 354  Classified By: Global Affairs Unit Chief Don Brown for Reasons 1.4(b) a nd (d).  1. (C) Summary: Current polling data suggest that the Christian Democrats (CDU/CSU) and the Free Democratic Party (FDP) could receive sufficient votes in the September 27 national elections to form a governing coalition.  The FDP are strong defenders of citizens' privacy rights and these views have led the FDP to oppose all of Germany's recent counterterrorism legislative proposals, as well as voice concerns about U.S.-German and U.S.-EU information sharing initiatives.  Throughout these debates, the FDP has favored data protection measures over the need for governments to strengthen security-related information sharing for counterterrorism purposes.  The FDP's strong views on individual liberties and personal privacy could lead to complications concerning law enforcement security cooperation and data sharing.  Were the FDP to join the government, we expect they would closely scrutinize any proposals for security officials to access and/or share information concerning private persons with international partners, including the USG.  End Summary.   THE FDP AND DATA PRIVACY ------------------------   2. (C) The FDP defines itself as a independent pro-business party, advocating low taxes, open trade, and minimal government intervention in business and private life.  The party promotes European liberalism, championing freedom and individual responsibility under a government "as extensive as necessary, and as limited as possible."  The FDP's limited government viewpoint shapes their views on counterterrorism policy.  Following the September 11 terrorist attacks and in reaction to a number of terrorist plots uncovered in Germany, successive German governments have passed a series of legislative packages that have strengthened Germany's counterterrorism legal frameworks and broadened the investigative powers of law enforcement agencies.  The FDP, which was not a member of these post-9/11 governing coalitions, regularly criticized these amendments for infringing on citizens' personal privacy rights.  The FDP's criticisms of security-related data sharing agreements have also extended to the U.S.-Germany bilateral "Pruem-like" agreement to share personal information on serious crime and terrorism suspects (ref C), the U.S.-EU Passenger Name Recognition (PNR) initiative, and elements of the Visa Waiver Program that involve sharing information on travelers.   FDP Objections to Counterterrorism Laws ---------------------------------------  3. (C) FDP parliamentarians and party leaders were strong critics of the CDU/CSU - SPD government's introduction of two new counterterrorism legislative proposals, the BKA Law and the Terror Camp Law.  Passed in 2008 and enacted at the beginning of 2009, the BKA Law increased the investigative powers of the Federal Office of Criminal Investigation (BKA).  The most controversial aspect of the BKA Law was that it permitted security officials to use a variety of technical surveillance measures in terrorism investigations (Ref B). Specifically, the law provides the BKA with the power to conduct remote, on-line investigations of the computers of terrorism and serious crime suspects.  The FDP strongly opposed these measures as an unnecessary invasion of privacy, despite the limitation of on-line searches to only life-threatening situations (or threats to the constitutional order of the German state).  These cases would require a judge's advance approval and are expected to number just a dozen cases per year.  Nevertheless, FDP parliamentarian Max Stadler called the measures "constitutionally questionable," and in a meeting with EMIN, Stadler feared that authorities would carry out surveillance without sufficient evidence of wrongdoing.  FDP parliamentarian Gisela Piltz warned that the law would turn the BKA into a "super spy agency resembling the FBI."  Former FDP Federal Interior Minister, Gerhart Baum, blasted the law, saying it violated privacy rights, freedom of the press, and the inviolability of private residences.   4. (C) Earlier this summer, the government passed legislation developed by the Justice Ministry that criminalized a range of terrorism-related preparatory actions such as distributing information on bomb-making and participating in para-military training overseas (ref A).  The law was developed in response to the September 2007 arrests in Germany of three homegrown terrorists who had attended an Islamic Jihad Union terrorism training camp in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region. Justice Ministry officials and prosecutors have told EconOffs that the new law has closed gaps in Germany's legal framework that had previously prevented German prosecutors from charging German citizens and residents with activities that directly or indirectly supported terrorist groups.  Prior to the passage of the law, the FDP criticized the draft as unnecessary, claiming that existing legislation was sufficient to arrest and prosecute potential terrorists in Germany.  The FDP also criticized that law for allegedly requiring prosecutors to be able to prove that individuals who participate in training at overseas terrorist camps actually intend to carry out attacks; that the law would thereby permit the punishment for thoughts, rather than for actions.  Justice Ministry officials have indicated to EconOffs that these criticisms are unfounded hyperbole and that prosecutors will be able to build strong cases against those who undergo training at foreign terrorist training sites.   FDP Objects to U.S.-German Data Sharing Agreement --------------------------------------------- ----   5. (C) Immediately following the March 2008 completion of the U.S.-German data sharing agreement to enhance cooperation in preventing and combating terrorism and other serious crime (aka, the Pruem-like agreement, Ref C), FDP parliamentarians began to express concerns regarding the agreement.  FDP members took particular aim at an article in the agreement that calls for additional data protection measures to be taken if special categories of personal data (such as ethnic origin, political opinion, religion, trade union membership, and sexual orientation) are transferred among law enforcement agencies.  (Comment: In our discussions with FDP parliamentarians, we explained that negotiators did not foresee that such information would need to be transferred regularly and that the article was inserted as a means of providing extra data privacy protections in the rare occurrence that such information was pertinent to an investigation.  End Comment.)  In meetings with EMIN, Stadler and Piltz also expressed objections to the data retention periods of the agreement, questioned which USG law enforcement agencies would have access to the information, and voiced a general concern about potential misuse of the personal information (names, DOBs, addresses, passport numbers, etc.) that would be shared by the agreement.  Piltz further claimed that the U.S. government as a whole lacked effective data protection measures in comparison to Germany and questioned why the USG does not have a overall federal data protection commissioner as Germany does.  (Comment: Piltz' remark underscores the importance of ensuring German officials receive information about USG data protection policy.  The April visit to Berlin by DHS Chief Privacy Officer Callahan was useful in this regard, but more needs to be done to ensure German officials understand U.S. data protection policy.  End Comment.)  6. (C) FDP leaders have also taken aim at U.S.-EU agreements that include data sharing elements.  Following the July EU GAERC decision to give the Swedish EU Presidency a mandate to begin negotiating a successor agreement governing USG access to the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications (SWIFT) database of financial transactions, FDP head Guido Westerwelle called the plan "totally unacceptable" and said that the "plan must be stopped."  Parliamentarian Piltz, who is a member of the Bundestag Interior Committee, has criticized the U.S.-EU Passenger Name Record (PNR) data transfer agreement for collecting "pointless" information on travelers and she doubts whether the information collected under PNR would be of any value to law enforcement officials.  In meetings with EconOffs, Piltz broadly spoke of governments, particularly that of the U.S., accumulating large amounts of data on their (mostly) innocent citizens.  Piltz expressed concerns that German commercial interests could be damaged when U.S. authorities obtained PNR data on German business travelers that might somehow be shared with American competitors.   Would the FDP be a reliable security partner? ---------------------------------------------  7. (C) The FDP's voting record on counterterrorism legislation and the views of leading FDP security policy figures described here suggest that cooperation on security matters, particularly those involving information sharing, with a future German government that includes the FDP could be problematic.  At times, the FDP's fixation on data privacy and protection issues looks to have come at the expense of the party forming responsible views on security policy.  The FDP has been out of power for over 10 years and lack experience tackling security issues in the Internet age.  The FDP appears not to fully grasp the transnational character of terrorism today and terrorists' increasing use of the Internet and related technology to recruit, train and organize.  Current Interior Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble (CDU) has repeatedly drawn attention to terrorist use of the Internet, which he calls the "main medium of holy war against the West - it is the communication platform, advertising medium, distance university, training camp, think tank and recruiting instrument for terrorists."  Schaeuble understands that combating terrorism in a globalized world requires international cooperation and for security officials to use modern technology.  No FDP leader has displayed a similar understanding of the need to find a proper balance between personal freedoms and security measures; the FDP has all too often found it politically expedient to cast these goals as mutually exclusive.  8. (C) At election campaign rallies last week FDP Chairman Guido Westerwelle criticized the on-line surveillance measures contained in the BKA law and championed the FDP as the sole party committed to data privacy and protection issues.  FDP parliamentarian Sabine Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger has been suggested as a possible Justice Minister in a CDU/CSU - FDP government, a job she previously held under Chancellor Helmut Kohl (CDU).  Given that she resigned as Justice Minister in 1996 after failing to obtain support for her rejection of a CDU proposal to expand the state's right to monitor private citizens, we would expect her to closely scrutinize all bilateral and U.S.-EU information sharing proposals.  In particular, a FDP-led Justice Ministry could well complicate implementation of the bilateral Pruem-like agreement, prevent negotiations on a HSPD-6 terrorist screening data sharing arrangement, and raise objections to U.S.-EU information sharing initiatives.  9. (C) An MFA official working in the counterterrorism office noted that one reason the FDP has been so vocal in opposing Germany's counterterrorism legislative drafts, bilateral and U.S.-EU security initiatives is due to the fact that they are in the opposition.  Pure political considerations dictate that the role of the opposition is to oppose the governing coalition's proposals.  Following this line of reasoning, were the FDP to join the CDU/CSU in a governing coalition, the responsibilities of power would perhaps convince them to take a more constructive approach to counterterrorism and security issues.  Furthermore, given that the FDP would be the junior partner in the coalition, we hope that CDU/CSU leadership would ensure that German legal frameworks are adequate and that law enforcement and security officials continue our current close cooperation and robust information sharing on operational matters.  Murphy
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 06 BERLIN 001176  NOFORN SIPDIS  STATE FOR EUR/CE, INR (KEETON) TREASURY FOR ICN (KOHLER) NSC FOR JEFF HOVENIER  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/22/2019 TAGS: ECON EFIN EINV ENRG ETRD GM KJUS PGOV PRELPTER, SENV SUBJECT: MERKEL VS. STEINMEIER? WHAT DO THE GERMAN ELECTIONS REALLY MEAN FOR U.S. INTERESTS?  REF: A. BERLIN 32      B. BERLIN 1002      C. BERLIN 1136      D. BERLIN 1138      E. BERLIN 1162  Classified By: MINISTER COUNSELOR FOR POLITICAL AFFAIRS GEORGE GLASS FO R REASONS 1.4 (B) and (D)  SUMMARY -------  1. (C/NF) This is not a "change" election.  The German public does not see the September 27 parliamentary elections as decisive, and on many foreign policy fronts, including Afghanistan, arms control, and Russia, we do not foresee significant or distinct policy differences between the two most feasible coalition options.  The most likely results of the elections are a CDU/CSU-FDP (black-yellow) coalition or a continued CDU/CSU-SPD Grand Coalition.  However, in some areas there may be changes, including on Iran, tax policy, and nuclear energy.  More importantly, there may be a new foreign minister who will likely need to get up to speed quickly on such crucial issues as Iran, Afghanistan, and NATO's strategic posture.  Leaders from the CDU/CSU and FDP promise a government more friendly toward the United States. The near certainty that Angela Merkel will remain chancellor argues for this, but the unpredictability of Foreign Minister-aspirant and FDP Chairman Guido Westerwelle may call for focused diplomatic engagement with the new FDP political actors (see REFTEL E for Post's comprehensive expose of Westerwelle).  END SUMMARY.  BLACK-YELLOW (CDU/CSU-FDP)? ---------------------------  2.  (C/NF) It is virtually certain that Angela Merkel will retain her position as Chancellor after this Sunday's elections.  But it is impossible to predict the final composition of the next coalition given that about a third of the electorate is still undecided and the polls show only a narrow parliamentary majority for black-yellow.  Chancellor Merkel has repeatedly voiced her preference for a black-yellow coalition and has promised to form one even with a one-vote parliamentary majority.  The FDP's Westerwelle has echoed this sentiment as its first choice as well.  3.  (C/NF) The SPD has almost no prospect of leading a government and is only likely to remain in power as a weakened junior partner in another Grand Coalition, should the CDU/CSU-FDP come up short of a parliamentary majority. The SPD has failed to gain much momentum, although it has more recently risen a couple of points in the polls.  It continues to suffer from an inability to profile itself against the CDU (or even a lack of desire to break with the CDU in any significant way), with which it has been in government for the past four years.  Also unhelpful have been a string of losses in local, state, and the June European Parliament elections.  4.  (C/NF) U.S. interests will not only be affected by the composition of the next coalition but also which parties are in the opposition.  A CDU/CSU-FDP coalition would bring to power a new set of top players at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Justice, Environment, and at either Economics or Finance (as well as probably at least one other FDP-led ministry with some turnover in CDU/CSU ministries as well). The extent to which policy will change is less obvious, however, because FDP Chairman and Foreign Minister aspirant Guido Westerwelle has promised considerable continuity with Steinmeier's approach to foreign policy.  In addition, the FDP's economic reform goals will face considerable resistance from the Bavarian CSU as well as parts of the CDU.  The lack of coordination and consistency, including between the Chancellery and MFA, that often occurs in German policy making will continue to be a challenge for the United States.   5.  (C/NF) A black-yellow coalition will face a more united opposition led by an SPD that is likely to move left if it leaves government and seeks to profile itself against the Greens and the Left Party, based on the profiles of SPD leaders waiting in the wings for Steinmeier and SPD Chairman  BERLIN 00001176  002 OF 006   Franz Muentefering to leave.  German governments can operate with narrow majorities due to strict party discipline (which gets stricter the narrower the majority), but Merkel has not shown much courage in using her considerable personal popularity to push through policies that lack public support.  On Afghanistan, in particular, a black-yellow coalition may seek to simply roll over the ISAF mandate unchanged when it comes up for renewal in December, rather than risk a row in the Bundestag over an increase in the troop ceiling, which the Defense Ministry has concluded is necessary to deal with the growing insurgency in the German north.  OR GRAND COALITION (CDU/CSU-SPD)? ---------------------------------  6.  (C/NF) However, another Grand Coalition cannot be discounted, even though nobody professes to want it.  It is a historical fact that the center-right parties have not won a parliamentary majority since 1994.  Another Grand Coalition would almost certainly be even more difficult for the CDU/CSU and the SPD than the current one since both parties would be eyeing each other with distrust and the expectation that the government may not last an entire term.  Further, Merkel's position within her party would be weakened by what would be viewed as her failure to achieve a coalition with the FDP while the Free Democrats would continue to take advantage of conservative dissatisfaction with the Grand Coalition's disgruntled CDU voters.  7.  (C/NF) The SPD leadership might be secretly relieved not to lose their government posts, but its continued partnership with the CDU/CSU would likely cause further bleeding of the party's more leftist supporters to the Greens and Left Party, further weakening its base.  In addition, the SPD left-right split might be exacerbated, with leftists tempted to prematurely rupture the Grand Coalition to build a majority red-red-green government where the SPD would hold the chancellorship.  CDU officials certainly believe -- and have told the Embassy -- that they expect the SPD would seek to replace a Grand Coalition with a red-red-green one some time during the term.  Even though Steinmeier has insisted that any coalition agreement would be for the entire legislative period, the distrust between the parties would remain.  Plus, if the SPD performs badly in the election, Steinmeier literally may no longer be in a position to keep his word.  GERMANY'S NEXT FOREIGN MINISTER - WESTERWELLE OR STEINMEIER? --------------------------------------------- ---------------  8.  (C/NF) The election's most obvious impact on bilateral relations will be in terms of a potential change in foreign ministers.  Our extensive experience with Steinmeier allows us to comfortably predict how a Steinmeier-led MFA would pursue German interests globally, and vis-a-vis the United States.  On the other hand, Westerwelle continues to remain an enigma who has been unable to establish himself as a significant voice on foreign affairs.  The FDP's foreign policy spokesman Werner Hoyer -- a well known foreign policy analyst in Germany and internationally, including in the United States -- has taken the lead here.  When we asked Hoyer this week what would change with Westerwelle, he struggled to say anything.  Westerwelle is a domestic political animal with little appetite for foreign policy and international affairs.  He will, therefore, continue to be dependent for foreign policy advice on his mentor, former Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher as well as on Hoyer and whichever Ministry diplomats gain his trust (REFTEL E).  9.  (C/NF) Westerwelle's attempt to position himself among Germany's foreign policy elite with a speech in May at the German Foreign Relations Council (DGAP) did not produce the intended results and instead revealed his limitations on such major issues as Middle East peace.  If Westerwelle becomes Germany's next foreign minister, his learning curve will be steep.  Germany's small foreign and security policy elite -- already skeptical of Westerwelle -- will resent his rise into the second most powerful political office of the land.  And we will be faced with the question of how best to approach someone who has clearly had a mixed relationship with the United States.  Despite Westerwelle's praise and respect for the current Obama Administration, we should not forget that, as part of the opposition, he has criticized the United States for the last eight years, while at the same time  BERLIN 00001176  003 OF 006   offering very few ideas of his own on how to solve international problems (see REFTEL E).  10.  (C/NF) If Steinmeier is able to lead the SPD to a strong enough showing to force a Grand Coalition, he certainly could maintain his position as Foreign Minister.  He would also have the increased political clout provided by a mandate in the Bundestag and his success in blocking a CDU/CSU-FDP coalition.  Obviously, there would be a high degree of foreign policy continuity.  Unlike Westerwelle, Steinmeier is already on board with both sides of the U.S. approach to Iran, and he has told the Ambassador that he supports additional sanctions should Tehran fail to respond to U.S. overtures.  However, competition between Steinmeier and Merkel over control of foreign policy will not end with the election, and Steinmeier would likely try to focus on a few key issues where he could differentiate himself and his party from Merkel and the CDU, with arms control, Afghanistan, and Russian relations being likely choices.  Steinmeier wants to work closely with Washington on these issues and is less likely to surprise Washington than the Chancellery would be.  11.  (C/NF) The goodwill that marked the first year of the Grand Coalition is unlikely to be repeated in a second term, particularly as Steinmeier contends with those in his own party who would prefer a leftist coalition.  If there is not enough support for a CDU/CSU-FDP coalition, then there would likely be a numerical red-red-green majority in the Bundestag.  The strained communication that currently marks Chancellery-MFA relations is likely to continue.  Both Steinmeier and Merkel are responsible realists, however, who understand the need to work together on the big issues, as was evident during the Russian invasion of Georgia, their approach to the Middle East, and their reaction to the international financial melt down.  If new crises arise, the two are likely to continue to put their own interests aside long enough to speak with a single voice.  FOREIGN POLICY ISSUES IN BLACK-YELLOW AND GRAND COALITIONS --------------------------------------------- -------------  12.  (C/NF) AFGHANISTAN (Some Change): Westerwelle is one of the few German politicians who justifies the Afghanistan deployment on the basis of "German national security interests" and the FDP as a whole has been a consistent supporter of the ISAF mandate.  But with only a narrow majority in the Bundestag and facing an SPD opposition ready to accuse them of militarizing the German mission, a CDU-CSU/FDP coalition ironically might be less willing (and able) to push through necessary troop increases than a Grand Coalition.  On the other hand, there is likely to be no difference between the two on the support for police training, economic assistance and other civilian aid.  13.  (SBU) ARMS CONTROL/NONPROLIFERATION (Little change): Westerwelle proudly says that the motto of the MFA under his leadership will be "peace through disarmament," thereby seeking to be even more pro-arms control than Steinmeier. Although Westerwelle has called for the removal of all U.S. tactical nuclear weapons from German soil by 2013, it is questionable whether he will manage to include this in a coalition agreement with the CDU/CSU given their likely resistance.  14. (C/NF) RUSSIA (No change): Like the SPD, the FDP sees Russia as a "strategic partner" in addressing issues such as Iran, energy, and Afghanistan and believes engagement and assistance with modernization is the best way to address Russia's democratic deficits.  Like Merkel and Steinmeier, Westerwelle has pursued close ties to Russian leaders, including Foreign Minister Lavrov and Defense Minister Ivanov, both of whom gave him high-profile meetings in Moscow this past spring.  15. (C/NF) IRAN (Some change): Steinmeier has been a steady supporter of US policy toward Iran -- both in terms of dialogue and the need for increased sanctions if necessary, while Westerwelle has spoken almost exclusively about the need for dialogue.  In addition, Westerwelle's FDP's pro-business orientation makes it particularly skeptical of sanctions and is also resistant to unilateral efforts to cut back trade.  Merkel will likely have to take a stronger role in this issue to keep Germany's position from falling back to  BERLIN 00001176  004 OF 006   the least common denominator.  16.  (C/NF) TURKEY (Some change): A black-yellow coalition may result in a subtle, less favorable, shift in Germany's policy towards Turkey with the exit of the SPD -- Turkey's staunchest supporter -- from the government.  Although FDP foreign policy experts recognize that EU membership is an important factor in encouraging additional domestic reforms in Turkey, it has kept an open mind on the issue.  However, the FDP is more vocal than the SPD in its criticism of Turkey.  17.  (C/NF) MIDDLE EAST (Little change): Westerwelle's views on Israel and Middle East peace may stem more from his past experience in addressing criticism against Israel and his interpretation of Germany's historical role toward Israel than from his own Middle East policy or strategic calculations.  Some attribute Westerwelle's current pro-Israel stance as the result of his having been burned politically both domestically and in Israel in 2002.  At that time, Westerwelle defended an FDP politician, Juergen Moellemann, who had published a brochure strongly critical of then Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's actions towards the Palestinians.  Some claimed the brochure was anti-Semitic.  While in Israel shortly thereafter, Westerwelle was questioned by then-PM Sharon about what Sharon referred to as a growing anti-Semitism in Germany and Europe.  In an August 2009 interview with "Der Spiegel," Westerwelle explained his decision to vote against Germany's participation in UNIFIL with his view that Germany cannot take a neutral position in the Middle East because of its past.  He noted that he had visited the Golan Heights in Israel as a young man and was impressed with the vulnerability of the country.  Even more so than Steinmeier, however, Westerwelle may seek a greater role for Germany and the EU in the Middle East.  In the "Spiegel" interview, he called for the EU to launch an initiative to establish a conference for security and cooperation in the Middle East. We could expect both Steinmeier and Westerwelle to hold to U.S. messages on the Middle East, with both competing with the Chancellery for the lead on this issue.  18. (C/NF) GUANTANAMO (No change): Steinmeier would likely take a more accommodating approach toward Germany accepting some of the Guantanamo detainees than would Westerwelle, but the key ministry in deciding this issue will continue to be Interior.  In either a black-yellow or another Grand Coalition, Wolfgang Schaeuble (CDU) could continue on as Interior Minister, although there is some talk of his being named as EU commissioner.  Schaeuble has been very skeptical of accepting detainees from a security standpoint.  More recently, he told the Ambassador that Germany would only take detainees who will require no surveillance.  19. (SBU) ECONOMIC CRISIS/INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL REGULATION (Little Change): All potential government parties share a similar strategy; increase regulation and supervision of the financial sector with differences at the margin.  The SPD advocates taxing share trades over 1000 euros and monitoring private equity funds more closely, while the CDU/CSU and FDP propose concentrating financial supervision under the Bundesbank.  A black-yellow government would result in a new Finance Minister; if Karl Theodor zu Guttenberg remains at the Economics Ministry, then the FDP might be given the Finance Minister, with Hans-Otto Solms, an experienced and cautious financial policy expert, the most likely replacement.  20. (C) CLIMATE CHANGE (No Change): There is little difference between the parties on issues in play at the upcoming UNFCCC's COP-15 in Copenhagen, and Merkel maintains strong control over German policy in this area.  There will be a new Environment Minister should a black-yellow government be formed, however, and it is unclear which party would then control the Ministry.  In previous CDU/CSU-FDP coalitions, the CDU ran it but if the FDP does as well as current polls suggest, it might make a play for the Ministry.  Current SPD Environment Minister Sigmar Gabriel has had a high profile in his party's Bundestag campaign and could remain in place in a Grand Coalition.  21. (C) ENERGY (Some Change): The SPD insisted on continuation of the previous government's plan to phase out nuclear power plants during the last coalition negotiations  BERLIN 00001176  005 OF 006   and would stick to this position again.  In contrast, the FDP has been the party most open to nuclear energy, insisting that the phase-out itself should be at least slowed down to protect Germany's supply of energy.  The CSU/CSU also wants to extend the possible life of existing nuclear power plants, provided they are safe, during a "transitional" period to provide time for Germany to switch to greater reliance on renewable sources.  Recent controversies over the safety of some nuclear power plants have made Merkel and even the FDP less willing to press for reliance on nuclear energy.  22. (C/NF) DATA PROTECTION (Little Change): Data privacy has been a second-tier campaign issue but does arise in debates on domestic security policy.  Another Grand Coalition could leave Justice Minister Brigitte Zypries (SPD) in place; she reluctantly agreed to the landmark data sharing initiative on serious crime and terrorism suspects (the Pruem-like agreement) due to privacy concerns.  A CDU/CSU-FDP coalition might return Sabine Leutheusser-Scharrenberger to the Justice Ministry, which she headed from 1992-96 in the last black-yellow coalition (she resigned her office after the her party agreed to wiretapping legislation proposed by the CDU/CSU).  She or any FDP Justice Minister would likely continue to see their role as the protector of civil liberties and therefore they would carefully scrutinize all bilateral and U.S.-EU data sharing initiatives.  23. (C/NF) COUNTER-TERRORISM/LAW ENFORCEMENT (Little change): The CDU will likely remain in control of the Interior Ministry regardless of the coalition, and Schaeuble, although 67, is likely but not certain to stay on for another term. He has brought U.S.-German CT cooperation to an unprecedented level, and no other German official has offered as much cooperation (except on the issue of resettling Guantanamo detainees where the focus on internal German security supersedes his desire to work with Washington).  Any possible replacement -- Chancellery Chief Thomas de Maiziere has been mentioned in the press -- is unlikely to have his authority or expertise but will likely continue his policies.  24. (U) TRADE (No change): All five parties are committed to open market but the SPD, Greens, and The Left Party want environmental and social standards included while the CDU/CSU stresses the need for protection of intellectual property and the FDP worries about domestic subsidies and market access. None of the parties wants to restructure the German economy to reduce export-dependency and address global imbalances. Other U.S. interests, such as concluding the Doha round of trade negotiations, would not likely be affected by a change in coalition.  25. (U) TAX POLICY (Some change): Tax policy is often cited as the area where a black-yellow government would produce change.  The FDP proposes a radical overhaul of the tax system to simplify the tax code and stagger the corporate rate.  CSU leader and Bavaria Minister-President Horst Seehofer has been critical of the FDP plan, which he says will run up the deficit and impose an excessive burden on the public budget.  Neither the CDU/CSU's nor FDP's tax proposals are realistic, however, in light of budget deficits that are expected to be more than 2 percent this year and 4 percent in 2010, just as mid-term targets for Germany's balanced budget amendment kick in.  Some sort of tax increase therefore is a near certainty, perhaps in the form of an increase in the value-added tax.  COMMENT -------  26. (C/NF) Chancellor Merkel will continue to exert strong influence on German foreign policy in an attempt to create a political legacy in international affairs.  This will be true whether the MFA is led by Steinmeier or Westerwelle.  We can also predict that tensions between the Chancellery and MFA will remain based on different coalition partners controlling them.  If Steinmeier returns to office, he will be a reliable partner.  Westerwelle is a wild card; his exuberant personality does not lend itself to taking a back seat to Chancellor Merkel on any issue.  If he becomes foreign minister, there is the possibility of higher profile discord between the Chancellery and MFA.  This may demand focused diplomatic engagement by the USG with the new FDP political actors.  END COMMENT.  BERLIN 00001176  006 OF 006   Murphy
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BERLIN 001197  SIPDIS  STATE FOR EUR/CE, INR (KEETON) NSC FOR JEFF HOVENIER  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/28/2019 TAGS: GM PGOV PRELSUBJECT: WESTERWELLE'S SURGE CLINCHES BLACK-YELLOW IN GERMANY; MERKEL GAINS SECOND TERM  REF: A. BERLIN 1188      B. BERLIN 1186      C. BERLIN 1176      D. BERLIN 1167      E. BERLIN 1162      F. BERLIN 1138      G. BERLIN 1179  Classified By: AMBASSADOR PHILIP D. MURPHY FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) and (D)  SUMMARY -------  1.  (C) Chancellor Merkel achieved her goal of a solid parliamentary majority for her Christian Democratic Union (CDU) with its Bavarian sister party, the Christian Social Union (CSU), and the pro-business Free Democratic Party (FDP), but will have to contend with a self-confident FDP that is likely to seek major concessions in terms of policy and personnel.  Nonetheless, the CDU/CSU's 33.8 percent showing was its lowest since 1949, while the FDP's 14.6 percent was its strongest in the history of the Federal Republic.  The SPD crashed, while the Left Party and Greens were able to score their highest results ever, with the Left Party surpassing the Greens overall and overtaking the SPD in the eastern German states by a wide margin.  Merkel hopes that coalition negotiations with the FDP will be "quick and decisive," while FDP Chairman Guido Westerwelle -- widely expected to be the next foreign minister -- has emphasized his intention to press for the party's goals of a fundamental tax reform, more emphasis on education, and stronger protection of civil liberties.   Merkel and Westerwelle already met privately election night (September 27) and coalition negotiations should begin soon, most likely with the goal of having a formal agreement with the selection of a cabinet by the time the Bundestag convenes a month from now. End Summary.  OVERALL TREND: MAJOR PARTIES IN DECLINE ---------------------------------------  2.  (U) The results show the decline of the major parties -- particularly the SPD -- and the strengthening of a five-party system.  Preliminary results give CDU/CSU 33.8 percent (versus 35.2 percent in 2005); the FDP 14.6 percent (9.8); the SPD 23.0 (34.3); the Left Party 11.9 (8.7), and the Greens 10.7 (8.1).  The decline in the CDU/CSU percentage is due particularly to the CSU's losses in Bavaria, where the party suffered its worst Bundestag result ever at 42.6 percent, down from 49.2 percent in 2005, but it still won all 45 of its constituencies.  These preliminary results give the CDU 24 "surplus mandates" because of the high number of constituency seats it won despite its low 33.8 percent second vote showing (see REFTEL G).  3.  (U) The new coalition should end up with control of both the Bundestag and the Bundesrat (Upper Council).  Based on the preliminary official results, the CDU/CSU will have 239 seats in the Bundestag (up from 226), which along with the 93 FDP Bundestag seats (previously 61) would give the new government a solid majority.  The SPD will have 146 seats in the Bundestag (down from 222), the Left Party 76 (versus 54) and the Greens 68 (versus 51).  The Schleswig Holstein election on September 27 also appears to have given the CDU and FDP a parliamentary majority in that state.  With CDU-FDP governments there and in Saxony, where the two parties won a majority on August 30, the new CDU/CSU-FDP coalition will soon have a majority in the Bundesrat and should be able to gain its approval of future coalition legislation.  4.  (C) Chancellor Merkel and her CDU/CSU Union are somewhat disappointed by their party's results, but are publicly emphasizing that the CDU/CSU-SPD Grand Coalition has met its demise and will be replaced by a center-right coalition composed of the CDU/CSU and FDP.  "We achieved something fantastic," said Chancellor Merkel, now facing a second four-year term.  "We achieved a stable majority in Germany for a new government...We can party tonight, but there is a lot of work waiting for us."  An uncharacteristically emotional Merkel -- clearly relieved by her victory -- promised to be the "Chancellor of all Germans" -- old and young, entrepreneurs and workers -- and said the CDU/CSU would be sufficiently dominant in the new coalition to prevail "in questions that affect social balance."  5.  (C) Despite her huge personal popularity, however, Merkel led her CDU/CSU Union to its second poorest result in history, leaving her vulnerable to future backstabbing within  BERLIN 00001197  002 OF 003   her party.  Merkel -- while happy to be rid of the Grand Coalition with the SPD -- now faces the challenging task of entering a coalition with a party that could prove to be more difficult to manage than the SPD.  Merkel will start talks with the FDP within days.  It could, however, take up to the end of October for the parties to forge the policy compromises and work out the distribution of cabinet posts necessary to seal a coalition deal.  FDP: THE REAL WINNER --------------------  6.  (C) The FDP will return to government after eleven years in opposition, having achieved its best election results in the party's history.  Its leader, FDP Party Chairman Guido Westerwelle, will most likely become Germany's next foreign minister (see REFTEL E).  At the FDP election celebration, Westerwelle told his party faithful that "We want to be part of the government.  But this means responsibility, and we are ready to take on this responsibility." Westerwelle said his party would work to ensure that Germany gets a "fair tax system and better educational opportunities" and that civil rights would once again be respected. The FDP will be in a very powerful position to demand a larger number of cabinet seats in a new German government. They are likely to expect to get at least the equivalent of what they have had in the past:  the foreign office, either justice or perhaps interior (which they led from 1969-82), economics or possibly finance, and at least one other ministry (in the past they have had education and economic cooperation (i.e. development). However, the FDP will find it difficult to negotiate a coalition agreement with the CDU/CSU over the coming weeks, especially in the areas of tax cuts (see REFTEL F) and civil rights, including data privacy (see REFTEL D).  SPD: HARD ROAD AHEAD --------------------  7.  (C) It would be hard to exaggerate the dimension of the SPD defeat.  The party fell more than 11 points to its worst result in the post-war period.  Its share of the eastern German vote was 19 percent, behind both the CDU and Left Party, and the FDP came within striking distance of the SPD in some western German states, including Bavaria, where the SPD's 17 percent was just ahead of the FDP's 15 percent.  The SPD election-night party was like a funeral, and Steinmeier and SPD party chairman Muentefering appeared grim-faced to announce that Steinmeier would be the Bundestag caucus chairman and thus unofficial leader of the opposition to the new black-yellow government.  Muentefering did not, as many expected, announce his resignation but it is likely to come by the time of the next party conference in mid-November.  8.  (C) Exit polls show that the SPD lost more than a million votes to former supporters who simply stayed home and additional voters to the Left Party and Greens, and that the public still blames it for the changes in unemployment insurance and the retirement age enacted during the Schroeder government and as part of the grand coalition.  The SPD, with only four minister-presidents and a shrunken parliamentary caucus, will have to decide how to profile itself against its two fellow leftist opposition parties, and the party left is likely to press for coalitions with the Left and Greens at the state level.  LEFT OVERTAKES GREENS ---------------------  9.  (C) The Left Party -- under Oskar Lafontaine's and Gregor Gysi's leadership -- can also claim electoral victory with their party's best showing ever in a parliamentary election. Having won 11.9 per cent of the total vote and 20 direct mandates -- the largest number ever for one of the smaller parties -- it will be difficult for Germany's other parties, especially the SPD, to ignore The Left's steady rise in popularity in east and west Germany (see REFTEL B).  The party successfully stole the SPD's thunder and was partially responsible for the SPD's poorest showing ever in German election history.  The Left Party can now concentrate on achieving the ultimate prize in German politics in 2013: a governing coalition with the SPD and the Greens.  Berlin SPD Governing Mayor Klaus Wowereit has already said that this year's election must be the last one in which the SPD excludes the possibility of cooperation with the Left, and he and other left-wingers in the SPD will likely fight to bring the two parties closer together.  GREENS: HOW TO STAY RELEVANT?  BERLIN 00001197  003 OF 003   -----------------------------  10.  (C) The Greens may have celebrated their first double digit showing (10.7 per cent) in a parliamentary election, but the party was unsuccessful in preventing a black-yellow coalition or becoming the third strongest party in the Bundestag (see REFTEL A).  Party Co-Chairman Cem Oezdemir -- who failed to win his direct mandate and was too low on the party list to win a seat in the Bundestag -- said that the Greens would establish themselves as a "think tank for social issues and for Germany as a whole."  The SPD's disastrous electoral result will remind the Greens that they may need to reach out to the CDU if they are to remain a relevant political power.  For the foreseeable future, Oezdemir hinted that his party would concentrate on achieving good results at future state elections and plotting their return to power in 2013.  COMMENT -------  11.  (C) Chancellor Merkel's main campaign objective -- to attract centrist support by out-positioning the SPD as the best protector of Germany's social welfare state -- was successful, although her CDU/CSU union suffered losses, primarily because of the CSU.  She will now have to find a way to balance this promise with FDP demands for greater reforms while dealing with the likely struggles between a strengthened FDP and a CSU that is concerned about its continued decline.  The parties will now enter complex coalition negotiations with pressure to complete them by the time that the new Bundestag convenes in late October, these talks have the potential to be very contentious.  Merkel will want to stamp her authority on the coalition agreement, while Westerwelle will be a tough bargaining partner for Merkel as he aims to extract the maximum amount of policy and personnel concessions from the CDU/CSU.  Finally, as a weakened SPD moves into the opposition, it can be expected that it will seek to continue the public debate on the major campaign issues and begin to rebuild itself, a process that could include its strong re-positioning to the left.  12.  (C)  What does a CDU/CSU-FDP victory mean for the United States?  On a practical level, Germany will have a new foreign minister, most likely Guido Westerwelle, who has enjoyed a difficult relationship with the United States during his time spent in opposition (see REFTEL D). Westerwelle will face a steep learning curve at the MFA, but we should not expect him to play second fiddle to Chancellor Merkel.  The foreign and security policy rivalry between the MFA and Chancellery during the Bush Administration will not disappear.  Indeed, they may be enhanced with Westerwelle's attempt to profile and make an international name for himself as quickly as possible, making it difficult for us to identify who is in the lead on any given issue.  Chancellor Merkel and Westerwelle will be competing for attention; the latter's flamboyant and outgoing style may give him a leg up but Chancellor Merkel will be keen to assert her primacy in international affairs, especially on economic and EU matters.  She has more government and foreign policy experience that will come in handy in this future duel, and in an age of international summitry, the Chancellor rather than the Foreign Minister calls the shots.  We should not underestimate her desire to carve out a political legacy for herself, especially in the international arena, and her record of strong cooperation with Washington suggests that her dominance is likely to have a net benefit for US interests.  13.  (U) This cable was coordinated with Consulates General Duesseldorf, Frankfurt, Hamburg, Leipzig, and Munich. Murphy
C O N F I D E N T I A L BERLIN 001271  NOFORN  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/09/2019 TAGS: PREL PGOV MNUC MARR GMSUBJECT: WESTERWELLE FIRM ON REMOVAL OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS FROM GERMANY IN COALITION NEGOTIATIONS  REF: A. BERLIN 1162      B. BERLIN 1241  Classified By: Political Minister Counselor George Glass for reasons 1. 4 (b,d).  1.  (C//NF) Summary: A well-placed FDP source said that on the first day of coalition negotiations (October 5) between the CDU, CSU and the FDP, FDP leader Westerwelle argued for the removal of the remaining non-strategic nuclear weapons from German soil.  Interior Minister Schaeuble (CDU) asserted that the weapons serve as a deterrent.  Other foreign policy issues discussed included support for Afghanistan and Turkey's accession to the EU.  Source said that Chancellor Merkel (CDU) may push to complete the negotiations by October 18, but noted that the FDP is in no hurry.  He provided Emboffs with a list of the membership of the negotiations plenary and working groups as well as timetable.  Cabinet composition will only be decided at the end of coalition negotiations.  End summary.  Westerwelle Firm on Removal of Nuclear Weapons --------------------------------------------- -  2.  (C//NF) Formal coalition negotiations between Guido Westerwelle's Free Democratic Party (FDP), Chancellor Merkel's Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and the Christian Social Union (CSU) on a coalition agreement began on October 5.  FDP strategist shared with Emboffs and visiting Senior Germany Desk Officer October 7 information on issues discussed during the first two days of these negotiations as well as the negotiations schedule and working group make-up. Source serves as his party's notetaker for the negotiations and has been a long-standing close Embassy contact.  3.  (C//NF) Source said that on October 5 negotiations included discussion on arms control in general and removal of the remaining non-strategic nuclear weapons from German soil.  He said that Federal Interior Minister Schaeuble argued that the weapons serve as a deterrent to Iran.  (Note: Regarding Schaeuble, source commented that he is "neurotic" in that he sees threats everywhere.  He questioned whether Schaeuble's influence is as great as it once was and whether he will stay in his position.  End note.)  According to source, Westerwelle asserted that nuclear weapons on German soil do not serve as a deterrent against Iran since they could not reach Iran.  He said that Westerwelle underlined that President Obama is moving forward toward a "nuclear-free world" and that he wants Germany to be in the lead.  Source said that Chancellor Merkel quipped in response that Germany is not that important in this regard -- the world would hardly take notice if there were action on this matter. According to source, Merkel wanted to avoid discussion of this topic.  Source also said that there was criticism of Social Democratic Party Foreign Minister Steinmeier that he did not respond adequately to President Obama's Prague speech in which he discussed arms control.  In response to Poloff query, source said that the issue of removal of nuclear weapons is very important to Westerwelle and that he could well seek to include something specific in the coalition agreement.  Turkey's EU Membership; Afghanistan; Transatlantic Relations --------------------------------------------- ---------------  4.  (C//NF) Source said that Turkey's accession to the EU was also discussed, with general agreement that Turkey is not ready for membership and could not fulfill membership criteria.  Source said that there was agreement that no decision would have to be reached on this issue within the next four years in any case.  Westerwelle also spoke against any type of automatic decision in favor of membership for Turkey.  There was also general agreement that the EU is not ready for new members at this time beyond Croatia.  5.  (C//NF) Afghanistan was also an issue, but source only noted that there was general agreement on the need to continue efforts in Afghanistan.  Source also stressed that the three parties support strong transatlantic relations and continuity in foreign policy.  The Devil's in the Details; What's the Rush? --------------------------------------------  6.  (C//NF) Source assessed some differences in Merkel's and Westerwelle's approach to the negotiations, although he also noted that the atmosphere was "very friendly and relaxed." He observed that Merkel preferred less detail and more general provisions, whereas Westerwelle was interested in a  detailed agreement that would guide the coalition over the next four years.  In addition, source noted that Merkel is trying to push the negotiations along since she would like to have the new government in place before she travels to Washington in early November and before the EU summit at the end of October.  Source indicated that Westerwelle might try to use Merkel's desire for speed to his advantage in the negotiations.  While he did not indicate that the FDP would prolong negotiations intentionally, he noted that the FDP was in no hurry to complete them.  Ministries Divided Among Parties Last -------------------------------------  7. (C//NF)  Regarding the possible make-up of the cabinet, source said that no decisions will be made until the end of coalition negotiations and that the current membership of working groups should not be seen as an indication of who will end up in which ministry (see ref B).  Source also said that the coalition agreement may only say which ministerial posts go to which coalition parties, without any names being given.  The names would only be provided later, perhaps after the Chancellor is voted in by the Bundestag.  Source noted that only two positions are certain: Angela Merkel will be Chancellor and Guido Westerwelle will be Vice Chancellor.  He added that Westerwelle will most likely also become the next foreign minister.  He then commented that during October 5 negotiations, Economics Minister zu Guttenberg demonstrated his interest in foreign policy and Hermann Otto Solms (FDP) showed he could play an increasingly important role in the financial area.  Source provided Emboffs with the names of those serving in the plenary rounds of the negotiations and a schedule of when those rounds will take place.  --Plenary Members from the CDU: Chancellor Merkel, Interior Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble, Chancellery Chief Thomas de Maziere, Education Minister Annette Shavan, CDU/CSU Caucus Chief Volker Kauder, CDU General Secretary Ronald Pofalla, Minister President of North Rhine-Westphalia (NRW) Juergen Ruettgers, Minister President of Hesse Roland Koch, Minister President of Lower Saxony Christian Wulff.  --Plenary Members from the CSU: Minister President of Bavaria and CSU Chair Horst Seehofer, Economics Minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg, Head of CSU Bundestag group Peter Ramsauer, CSU Secretary General Alexander Dobrindt, Bavaria State Parliament President Barbara Stamm, Bavaria Plenipotentiary Markus Soeder, Bavaria Finance Minister Georg Fahrenschon, Bavaria Justice Minister Beate Merk.  --Plenary Members from the FDP: Party Chair Guido Westerwelle, FDP Secretary General Dirk Niebel, Bundestag Vice President Hermann Otto Solms, FDP Deputy Caucus Chairperson Birgit Homburger, Lower Saxony Minister for Economics Philipp Roesler, FDP deputy chair Rainer Bruederle, Deputy Minister President for NRW Andreas Pinkwart, Deputy Chairperson Bundestag Education Committee Cornelia Pieper, Bavaria State Chairperson Sabine Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger.   Comment -------  8.  (C//NF) Westerwelle has made the removal of nuclear weapons from Germany one of his flagship issues in the foreign policy arena and has raised this in various fora in the past.  It is not clear how hard he will push to have a specific provision on this included in the coalition agreement.  Judging by source's description of the discussion, Merkel would rather have a more general provision regarding disarmament included and preferred to avoid prolonged discussion on this issue.  9.  (C//NF) The CDU/CSU is the only party that still supports German participation in the NATO nuclear share and the deployment of U.S. nuclear weapons in Germany.  While the CDU/CSU leadership is willing to fight for the current policy, it is concerned that the ongoing Nuclear Posture Review could significantly change U.S. policy on the deployment of non-strategic nuclear weapons in Europe, putting it at a significant political disadvantage vis-a-vis the rest of the German political establishment.  In fact, senior Chancellery officials have already requested that they be pre-notified about any possible change in U.S. policy (ref C).  We expect that in these coalition negotiations, the CDU/CSU may hedge their bets against a possible U.S. policy change by agreeing to language that commits the next government to seek consultations on this issue at NATO, with the caveat that any decision must be made by the Alliance as  a whole and must take account of the large number of Russian non-strategic nuclear weapons oriented against NATO member states.  Post will seek meetings with source after the plenary negotiation rounds to see if additional readouts are possible.  10.  (C//NF) FDP source is a young, up-and-coming party loyalist, who has offered Emboffs internal party documents in the past.  Excited with his role as FDP negotiations notetaker, he seemed happy to share his observations and insights and read to us directly from his notes.  He also provided copies of documents from his "negotiations" binder. Murphy
C O N F I D E N T I A L BERLIN 001296  NOFORN  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/15/2019 TAGS: PGOV PRELSUBJECT: GERMANY COULD HAVE NEW COALITION GOVERNMENT WITHIN TWO WEEKS  REF: BERLIN 1271  Classified By: Political Minister Counselor George Glass for reasons 1. 4 (b,d).  1.  (C//NF) Summary: A well-placed Free Democratic Party (FDP) source told Emboffs October 15 that Chancellor Angela Merkel aims to finish coalition negotiations between her Christian Democratic Union, the Christian Social Union, and the FDP by October 18, but that the FDP viewed a completion of October 23 to be more feasible.  Either date would allow the parties to hold conventions to approve the agreement during the following days and enable the Bundestag to elect Angela Merkel Chancellor on October 28, one day after the first scheduled meeting of the new Bundestag.  FDP source said that in any case, the virtually certain future Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle would want to do the Chancellor "the favor" of ensuring her election before her upcoming visit to Washington on November 2.  A worst case scenario -- and least likely -- is that she would be elected by November 8, source said, just prior to the November 9 fall of the Wall anniversary.  Source provided Emboffs with a list of the 15 mostly domestic-oriented points included in the FDP campaign platform that it wants to see included in the coalition agreement, including withdrawal of the remaining non-strategic nuclear weapons from German soil, the only one addressing foreign policy (reftel).  End summary.  2.  (C//NF) Source provided Emboffs with a schedule of the next days of the coalition negotiations.  The schedule showed that the various working groups of the negotiations would each report to the plenary (see reftel) October 16-17, with a smaller group of the plenary then meeting on October 17 to iron out disputed issues and beginning discussions on division of the ministerial portfolios between the parties. Chancellor Merkel, source said, hopes to wrap up the coalition negotiations on October 18 after a full-day plenary session, a goal he described as "very ambitious but possible."  Source noted that the FDP was not as optimistic that a conclusion could be reached as of October 18, and scheduled three more plenary sessions for October 21, 22 and 23.  He noted that it is feasible that a coalition agreement could be concluded by that date and that the three parties would then hold conventions to approve the agreement in the days following.  3.  (C//NF) This schedule would enable the Bundestag to then elect Merkel as Chancellor October 28, the day after its first plenary.  Source noted, however, that the FDP has alerted the party of three possible  party convention dates: October 25 -- if things go as plans, November 1 -- if negotiations are prolonged, or November 8 -- worst case scenario.  Source said that it would not be "unattractive" for Westerwelle to attend the EU Summit October 29-30.  This would be a good "debut" for Westerwelle, he added.  In the event negotiations are prolonged, source said that Westerwelle would like to do the Chancellor "the favor" by enabling her to be elected Chancellor before she travels to Washington November 2.  4.  (C//NF) About the actual negotiations, FDP source provided Emboffs with 15 points from their election platform that the FDP would like to see included in the coalition agreement.  The majority of the 15 points focus on domestic economic and social issues, including structural tax reform, amendments to the social welfare and pension systems, and support for education.  The points also include the goal of ending what is termed "unnecessary and ineffective" measures to censor the internet and preventing domestic military deployments.  The final point, and the only one that concerns foreign policy, calls for "entering negotiations with our allies" in order to achieve a withdrawal of nuclear weapons stationed in Germany during the next legislative term. (Note: In response to Emboff questions, source said that the goal really is to develop a plan for the withdrawal of the nuclear weapons.  End note.)  FDP source said that conscription is a disputed issue that is still under discussion.  Regarding Turkey's EU membership, FDP source said that the FDP would rather not include anything on this subject in the agreement, arguing that it will not be at issue during the next four years.  5.  (C//NF) FDP source assessed that about 85 percent of the issues will be decided during this coming weekend.  The FDP intends to keep the remaining 15 percent of the issues open and use them as bargaining tools for decisions on the division of ministerial portfolios.  Regarding portfolios, FDP source commented off the record that current Interior Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble had been trying to serve as the  CDU's "grey eminence,"  seeking to exert influence over many of the working groups, beyond his own working group of internal security.  Source said that the FDP viewed his role negatively, and that he was referred to within the FDP as "an angry old man."  He indicated that he hoped the CDU would also view his role as counterproductive.  Source, however, noted that the agreement will only state which ministerial portfolios each party will receive, without providing any names.  He stressed that it is up to each party to then decide who will fill those positions.   Murphy
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BERLIN 001360  SENSITIVE  DEPT FOR EUR/CE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: PGOV PINR GMSUBJECT: THE NEW GERMAN CABINET - AN OVERVIEW  Ref: Berlin 1337, Berlin 1340, Berlin 1167  BERLIN 00001360  001.2 OF 004   1. (SBU) Chancellor Merkel's new Cabinet emerged early on October 24 after a month of intense media speculation about its make-up; it contained several surprises.  Perhaps the most unexpected announcements were that of former Interior Minister Schaeuble as Finance Minister and former Economics Minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg as the new Defense Minister.  The Christian Democratic Union (CDU) will run the Chancellery as well as six ministries and have a minister without portfolio, the Free Democratic Party (FDP) will hold five as well as the Vice Chancellorship, and the Christian Social Union (CSU), three.  The ministerial competencies and their names remain unchanged.  Following is a short description of Merkel's new Cabinet, which was formally sworn in on October 28:  Chief of the Chancellery and Minister Without Portfolio: Ronald Pofalla (CDU) --------------------------------------  Pofalla, 50, takes over from Thomas de Maiziere as the Chancellor's chief of staff.  Pofalla is a lawyer and since 2005 served as CDU Secretary General.  He is known as a close confidant of Angela Merkel.  As Secretary General, he had been criticized as lacking a public profile and not being aggressive enough.  From 2004-2005 he served as deputy caucus leader for economics and labor issues in the Bundestag.  Also within the Chancellery, Merkel's security and foreign policy advisor Christoph Heusgen remains, as do Maria Boehmer as Minister of State for Migration, Refugees and Integration and Bernd Neumann, Minister of State for Culture and Media.  Eckart von Klaeden (CDU and a Merkel confidant) becomes State Minister in the Chancellery for coordination with the federal states and parliamentary contacts.  Foreign Affairs: Guido Westerwelle (FDP) ---------------------------------------  Westerwelle, 47, becomes Foreign Minister and Vice-Chancellor -- as expected.  Economic Assistance will not be included in the Foreign office, but the FDP will also control that ministry.  Minister of State within the MFA will be Werner Hoyer, who already served in that function under Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel from 1994-1998. He also was Westerwelle's foreign policy adviser in the election campaign.  He will cover all divisions apart from "culture" and "economics and sustainable development."  The other Minister of State is Cornelia Pieper, deputy FDP chairperson, who has no experience in this field and will reportedly focus on cultural and communication issues.  Martin Biesel, Westerwelle's Bundestag chief of staff, will become a State Secretary within the MFA to coordinate the work of the FDP ministries with the Chancellery.  Westerwelle has described Biesel as his closest advisor.  Defense: Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg (CSU) ----------------------------------------  The CSU's rising star, zu Guttenberg, 37, seemed certain to remain in the cabinet.  However, there was speculation that his Economics Ministry seat would be up for grabs.  When Economics went to the FDP and Finance to Schaeuble, zu Guttenberg's best fit was in Defense. The DefMin job gives zu Guttenberg the opportunity to work on foreign and security issues again, which was his main area of interest as a parliamentarian.  He is seen as a good and capable replacement for Jung, who was widely criticized for being overly cautious and inarticulate in explaining security and defense issues to the German public.  Zu Guttenberg is expected to improve the Defense Ministry's image, prestige and weight within the cabinet through his popularity and public relations talents.  His appointment has already boosted morale among working level officials in the MOD, who believe that zu Guttenberg will make MOD a real player once again in German security policy debates.  He is a transatlanticist and well known in Washington.  He will likely give the Defense Ministry a higher profile.  He will retain the current Parliamentary State Secretaries Thomas Kossendey (CSU) and Christian Schmidt (CSU).  Interior: Thomas de Maiziere (CDU) ---------------------------------  De Maiziere, 55, a lawyer, is a confidant of Angela Merkel and has served as her chief of staff in the Chancellery for four years.  He had been mentioned as a potential finance minister, but reportedly, his personal preference was interior.  He brings some experience to the job, since he served as state interior minister in Saxony 2004-2005 and as state minister of justice 2002-2004.  However, some of the issues he will face as federal interior minister, namely international terrorism, are topics he has less exposure to.  De Maiziere is known to be a consensus builder who works the interagency process well and is a good problem solver.    BERLIN 00001360  002.2 OF 004   Finance: Wolfgang Schaeuble (CDU) ---------------------------------  Merkel wanted a political heavy weight in this difficult position during the financial and economic crisis.  Schaeuble, 67, is an experienced, strong and well established politician from Germany's southwest, who is expected to fill his new role quite well.  He has by far the longest federal government experience in Merkel's cabinet.  Confined to a wheel chair since he was shot during a campaign rally in 1990, the conservative politician from the German southwest is not known as a close friend of Chancellor Merkel's.  A member of the Bundestag since 1972, he is pragmatic, copes well with pressure, and is known for his fierce loyalty.  He does not shy away from confrontation and will be ready to pursue unpopular or controversial measures.  In light of his age and his political standing, he does not have to fear any consequences for his future career, which a younger candidate would take into consideration. While he had to give up the Interior Ministry (which he reportedly liked very much), he is being compensated by running one of the most influential ministries in the cabinet.  While he cooperated well during the coalition talks, political observers would have expected major clashes with FDP Justice Minister Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger over domestic security issues if he had remained in the Interior Ministry.  Economics and Technology: Rainer Bruederle (FDP) --------------------------------------------- --  Bruederle, 64, has been deputy caucus chief and economic spokesman of the FDP in the Bundestag.  He already served as economic minster in Rhineland Palatinate 1987-1998, where he strongly promoted wine-growers, trade, and small and midsize business.  Since 1983 he has been state chairman of the FDP in Rhineland Palatinate and member of the national executive committee and since 1995 deputy national party chairman.  Hans-Joachim Otto and Ernst Burgbacher (both FDP) will become State Secretaries within that Ministry.  Labor and Social Affairs: Franz-Josef Jung (CDU) --------------------------------------------- --  Defense Minister Jung, 60, was unexpectedly switched to the Labor and Social Affairs ministry.  Jung had fallen victim to much criticism during his tenure as Defense Minister and Merkel had been pressured to replace him.  Merkel, however, had to find another cabinet post for Jung to maintain a proportional regional representation in the cabinet - Jung's state of Hesse had to be represented.   Another reason for Merkel to keep Jung in the cabinet in spite of his weaknesses and previous failures is his loyalty as a minister.  Justice: Sabine Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger (FDP) --------------------------------------------- --  Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger, 58, is FDP chairperson and caucus chief in Bavaria.  She successfully ran the 2008 FDP election campaign in that state, where the FDP reentered the state parliament after 14 years of absence.  She was the FDP's chief negotiator on Justice in the coalition talks.  She previously served as Justice Minister under Chancellor Kohl from 1992-1996, but resigned in opposition to legislation allowing electronic eavesdropping of private residences, which was planned by her own government.  She has a strong focus on civil rights and data protection, and has been critical of what she views are overly intrusive wiretapping and other electronic surveillance measures (see ref C).  Family Affairs, Senior Citizens, Women and Youth: Ursula von der Leyen (CDU) --------------------------------------  Von der Leyen, 51, a medical doctor and mother of seven, had indicated a strong interest in moving to the health portfolio and worked out that respective section of the coalition agreement for the CDU.  Merkel reportedly was not interested, however, in the CDU controlling the health ministry in light of the necessary but unpopular reforms and increasing costs of health care for citizens. Since the health ministry went to the FDP, von der Leyen will remain in her current position. In the past few years, von der Leyen has successfully modernized the family policy of the CDU and thus its image in this sector.  She is one of Germany's most popular politicians according to public opinion polls.  Health: Philipp Roesler (FDP) ----------------------------  Roesler, 36, is the youngest member of the cabinet and his nomination was a surprise.  He is sharp and dynamic and a rising star of the FDP.  He was state secretary general, state party chairman and eventually economics minister in Lower-Saxony.  He was born in Vietnam and was adopted by a German family.  Both Roesler  BERLIN 00001360  003.2 OF 004   and his wife are medical doctors, which gives him some practical background for his new portfolio.  Roesler negotiated the health section of the coalition agreement for the FDP.  Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety: Norbert Roettgen (CDU) -------------------------------------  Roettgen, 44, a close confidant of Chancellor Merkel had also been named as potential chief of staff at the Chancellery.  He has worked closely with the Chancellor since her days as caucus chairman 2002-2005.  Merkel reportedly appreciates his loyalty and analytical talents.  During the financial crisis he became one of her closest advisors.  While he does not have a reputation for expertise in his new portfolio, Merkel obviously wanted to position many of her confidants in the new cabinet.  Environmental issues, especially climate change, will figure prominently for Merkel.   Education and Research: Annette Schavan (CDU) ---------------------------------------------  Schavan, 54, will keep her current cabinet position.  Even though she did not have a prominent record, as a confidant of Angela Merkel, it was assumed that she would stay on as a member of the cabinet.  Transportation, Building, and Urban Development:  Peter Ramsauer (CSU) -----------------------------------  Since November 2005, Ramsauer, 55, has served as head of the CSU group in the Bundestag and deputy CDU/CSU caucus chief.  As minister for construction, housing and transportation, he will have a huge budget to work with.  Food, Agriculture, and Consumer Protection: Ilse Aigner (CSU) -------------------------------------------  Aigner, 44, only became Minister for Agriculture and Consumer Protection in October 2008.  She came to this job as an expert on research issues and new to the realities of production agriculture. In her tenure, some parts of the German agriculture community have been critical of her performance, particularly her close relationship to Bavarian Minister President Horst Seehofer. The CSU was interested in keeping this portfolio since agriculture continues to play an important and tactical role in Bavaria.  Economic Cooperation and Development: Dirk Niebel (FDP) --------------------------------------------- -----  Niebel, 46, has been Secretary General of the FDP since May 2005 and belongs to the inner leadership circle of the FDP.  He was named as a potential minister since he made strong contributions to the electoral success of the FDP.  His actual expertise would have been labor and social affairs.  However, that portfolio went to the CDU. The FDP sought in the coalition talks to have the Ministry of Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) merged with the MFA, but failing that, having control of both ministries goes a long way to meeting its concern that BMZ development policy be in line with MFA priorities, especially on key issues like Afghanistan.  Media commentary has focused on Niebel's lack of previous experience in development assistance, and how he may essentially serve as a department head under Foreign Minister Westerwelle.  Comment -------  2.  (SBU) With five ministries in the new cabinet, the FDP is arguably one of the most powerful junior coalition partners in recent German history in terms of both the number and quality of their cabinet appointments.  The Greens had three, mostly junior, ministries in their coalition with the Social Democrats from 1998-2005.  The FDP has one more than it had during its last coalition with the CDU.  This is due in part to the election outcome in which the FDP had its strongest-ever performance, with 14.6 percent of the vote.  CDU officials also describe the appointments as partial compensation for the policy concessions the FDP made during coalition negotiations.  The CDU/CSU will have the popular and competent Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg as Defense Minister, balancing the FDP's control over Foreign Affairs and Development Assistance.  Zu Guttenberg -- a strong transatlanticist -- is well-connected in Washington and already has a strong background in foreign and security policy.  There has been some criticism that the new Cabinet does not have any representation from eastern states. Merkel responded to the criticism reminding that in fact the Chancellor herself counts as representing the East.  End comment.   BERLIN 00001360  004.2 OF 004   3.  (U) This cable was coordinated with Consulates Frankfurt, Leipzig, Munich, Hamburg and Duesseldorf.  Murphy
S E C R E T BERLIN 001393  NOFORN SIPDIS  STATE FOR EUR, S/CT, L DHS FOR OIA SCARDAVILLE  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/04/2019 TAGS: PGOV PTER PREL KHLS KJUS GMSUBJECT: GERMANY'S NEW INTERIOR MINISTER FACES STEEP LEARNING CURVE  REF: A. BERLIN 1377      B. BERLIN 1167      C. BERLIN 988      D. 2008 BERLIN 1455      E. 2008 BERLIN 504  Classified By: Robert A. Pollard, Minister-Counselor for Economic Affai rs for Reasons 1.4(b) and (d).  1. (C) SUMMARY: Germany's new federal interior minister, Thomas de Maiziere, is known for being a competent administrator who performed effectively over the past four years as the Chancellery Chief of Staff.  De Maiziere is a close confidant of Chancellor Merkel, their professional relationship dates back to 1990, and he developed a reputation as a reliable crisis manager and interagency master over the past four years.  Although de Maiziere previously served as a state interior minister in Saxony, he has less direct experience dealing with the international security issues - most prominently counterterrorism - that he will face as federal interior minister.  Furthermore, de Maiziere is not known for being ideological or outspoken.  In this respect, de Maiziere represents a marked change from his predecessor, powerhouse Wolfgang Schaeuble, who had strong views on security policy and was willing to endure considerable criticism to achieve his policy goals.  We do not expect de Maiziere to push for further expanding law enforcement powers of police and/or security services.  De Maiziere indicates that he intends to focus on integration of foreigners into German society and will continue the Ministry's Islam Conference, a controversial Schaeuble initiative that had advanced the country's discussion on immigration and discrimination issues.  He also intends to promote the further integration of former east and west Germany.  END SUMMARY   An Aristocratic Westerner Makes His Name in the East --------------------------------------------- -------   2. (U) De Maiziere, 55, is a lawyer by training who was born and raised in Bonn, but has spent nearly the last two decades in the eastern states of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern and Saxony. He is a descendent of the noble Maiziere-les-Metz family who, as Huguenots, fled France for asylum in Prussia in the late seventeenth century.  De Maiziere's father, Ulrich, was Inspector General of the German Armed Forces.  His cousin, Lothar, was the last, and only democratically elected, Premier of the German Democratic Republic, who later served as a minister in the Kohl government.  As a staffer in the offices of Berlin Governing Mayor Richard von Weizsacker, and later Eberhard Diepgen, de Maiziere participated in the negotiations on German reunification.  After 1990, de Maiziere worked to re-establish democratic structures in eastern states starting first in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern. From 1998 through 2005, de Maiziere served in Saxony as head of the State Chancery, and as Finance, Justice and Interior Minister.  De Maiziere joined the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) as a student in 1972.  De Maiziere won a direct mandate in the September 27 national parliamentary election and is now a member of the Bundestag representing the district of Meissen in Saxony.   3. (C) De Maiziere first met Angela Merkel in 1990 and his recommendation of her to his cousin Lothar de Maiziere is said to have facilitated her entry into CDU politics. Chancellor Merkel and de Maiziere are known to have a very close professional relationship and to share a similar sober and analytical approach to governing.  De Maiziere is reported to have performed well throughout his tenure as Merkel's Chancellery Chief and Minister for Special Duties. As Chancellery Chief of Staff, de Maiziere was known as a consensus builder who understands and effectively works the  interagency process, sometimes requiring competing ministers to resolve disputes among themselves.  The Chancellor no doubt appreciated de Maiziere's efforts to shield her from these policy battles given her general propensity to stay above the fray and to express an opinion on an issue only when consensus has been reached at the cabinet level.   De Maiziere Faces a Steep Learning Curve ----------------------------------------   4. (C) De Maiziere's experience in eastern Germany helped him gain new responsibilities for the Federal Interior Ministry: the entire Department of Eastern German affairs has been moved from the Transportation and Urban Affairs Ministry to the Interior Ministry.  In his remarks to ministry employees on his first day in office, de Maiziere said that with this move the interior ministry is now responsible for not only immigrant integration, but also the integration of Eastern and Western Germany and the cohesion of German society.  De Maiziere will continue the German Islam Conference, an initiative started by his predecessor, which seeks to improve the integration of Germany's Muslim population and open a dialogue between the government and Germany's Muslim community.  The Islam Conference has met with some controversy and came under scrutiny earlier this year when it was discovered that some Muslim representatives were alleged to have links with extremist groups.   5. (S/NF) De Maiziere has some familiarity with security issues given that his duties in the Chancellery included overall coordination of Germany's intelligence services.  De Maiziere was helpful in promoting cooperation between German ministries and security services with USG counterparts both during the 2007 Sauerland Islamic Jihad Union terrorist cell case and following extremist threats surrounding the recent national elections.  De Maiziere's predecessor Wolfgang Schaeuble spent considerable time dealing with the issue of terrorism and working to update Germany's legal frameworks and expand the mandates of law enforcement agencies to ensure they had the capabilities to address the phenomena.  In contrast, de Maiziere said virtually nothing in public on the issue of terrorism during his time in the Chancellery, and he has not emphasized the topic since moving to Interior. Therefore, there is some question concerning the depth of his knowledge of the transnational character of terrorism, radicalization pathways, and terrorists' increasing use of the Internet and related technology to recruit, train and organize, aspects of the issue that most affect Germany today.   6. (C) During his first day remarks to employees, de Maiziere made the peculiar statement that "the Interior Ministry is responsible for internal matters, and the Foreign Ministry is responsible for issues external to Germany."  This characterization of the MoI's tasks contrasts sharply with EU law enforcement integration initiatives under Schaeuble such as the Pruem data sharing agreement.  Observers are concerned that de Maiziere's limited perspective could result in diminished bilateral cooperation and mark a significant departure from former minister Schaeuble, who placed a heavy emphasis throughout his tenure on increasing security cooperation with European and other international partners. De Maiziere would benefit from learning about the benefits of international cooperation first hand from his counterparts at the G6 meeting in London this week, which DHS Secretary Napolitano and senior DoJ representatives will attend. (Note: The G6 is an informal grouping of the interior ministers of Germany, Italy, Spain, France, Poland and the UK.  Schaeuble made a point of inviting the USG to G6 meetings that he hosted, a custom that UK Minister Jacqui Smith is following for this week's London meeting.  Ref D.)   Will de Maiziere be a Strong Security Partner? --------------------------------------------- -   7. (C) We do not expect de Maiziere to be aggressive in pushing for expanded security powers.  However, there is less need for this as two recent legislative packages have already strengthened Germany's counterterrorism legal framework (Refs C and E).  More relevant is whether de Maiziere will build on Schaeuble's record of deepening U.S.-German security cooperation, such as the successful negotiations of a bilateral "Pruem-like" agreement to exchange information on terrorism and serious crime suspects, as well as establish an automated fingerprint checking system.  Final implementation of our agreement is awaiting resolution of some concerns raised by a Green Party Justice Senator from Hamburg.  We will likely need support from de Maiziere to break this impasse, but it is unclear whether de Maiziere is willing to make the effort on an initiative that his predecessor initiated and for which he received heavy criticism due to data privacy concerns.  On the issue of resettlement of Guantanamo detainees, de Maiziere has yet to express a viewpoint one way or the other.   8. (C) We anticipate that data protection and domestic security issues will be a continuing theme that the new coalition government of the Christian Democrats (CDU and CSU) and Free Democrats (FDP) will struggle with.  During the previous administration, the FDP regularly criticized former interior minister Schaeuble for policies which the FDP believed trampled on citizens' privacy rights (Ref B). Germany's new Justice Minister Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger (FDP) believes that Schaeuble went too far in giving police new powers of investigation, and she was successful in committing the new government to modify a number of these powers and introducing added data protection measures in the recently completed coalition agreement (Ref A).  The FDP has found it politically expedient to cast personal freedoms and security policy as mutually exclusive.  In this debate, de Maiziere's greatest advantage is that he is not Schaeuble. As Interior Minister, de Maiziere is expected to support existing laws and practices initiated by his predecessor, and his reputation for reasonableness and consensus-building should serve him well in these discussions. MURPHY
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BERLIN 001395  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/04/2019 TAGS: ETRD ECON ELAB PREL RU GMSUBJECT: GM DECISION NOT TO SELL OPEL GREETED BY SHOCK AND ANGER IN GERMANY  REF: A. BERLIN 01131      B. BERLIN 01093      C. BERLIN 00390      D. BERLIN 00272      E. BERLIN 00214  BERLIN 00001395  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: ECONMIN Robert A. Pollard for reasons 1.4 (b,d).  1. (C) Summary: Just hours after Chancellor Merkel's historic November 3 address to a joint session of Congress, General Motors (GM) canceled its sale of Opel to Canadian auto parts manufacturer Magna.  The decision, which followed repeated assurances from GM that it was a done deal, came as a complete shock in Germany and dominated media coverage throughout the day.  Merkel herself was reportedly highly upset over GM's flip flop.  Ulrich Wilhelm, the Chancellor's spokesman on Opel said the German government "regretted" the decision, and reminded GM that it must now repay Berlin's 1.5 billion bridge loan to Opel by the end of the month, while FDP Economics Minister Rainer Bruederle described GM's action as "totally unacceptable."  The cabinet was expected to discuss the GM move on November 4. Opel's labor unions, which had strongly backed the Magna sale because of its promise to save jobs and keep plants open, announced that workers would withdraw all concessions made under the terms of the Magna deal and sta rt a general strike at Opel plants on November 5.  While anger is widespread, there are already some voices outside the government advocating acceptance of GM's announcement as the only viable alternative to a total collapse of Opel.  End Summary.   Germany's Political Establishment Reacts with Anger --------------------------------------------- ------  2. (C) Opinion across the political spectrum has been uniformly negative.  FDP Economics Minister Rainer Bruederle blasted GM's behavior as "totally unacceptable."  Juergen Ruettgers, Minister President of Nordrhein Westfallen (CDU), asserted that GM's decision showed "the ugly face of turbo capitalism." The leadership of the FDP, whose opposition to government intervention in the Opel deal is well known, joined in the condemnation of GM.  A high-level source indicated that Chancellor Merkel is furious over the GM move and refuses to talk to GM's leadership.  It is likely to be only a matter of time before critics will call Merkel herself into account for her strong support of the now collapsed Magna deal.  The Cabinet has been called into session and is likely to confirm the withdrawal of all financial support and a demand that GM repay the government's 1.5 billion Euro bridge loan by the end of the month.  3. (C) Jochen Homann, the Economic Ministry State Secretary heading the German interagency working group on Opel, told EMIN on November 4 that there was no possibility of further German financial assistance to Opel in the foreseeable future.  The failure of the Magna deal and GM's reputation as "an unreliable partner" would likewise complicate negotiations with other governments seeking to preserve Opel jobs and factories.  Although no one directly blamed the USG, the Germans are still having trouble understanding how GM could act independently of Washington.  Dr. Schubert, one of Homann's lieutenants, complained to the Embassy that "if the U.S. Government had GM under better control, this would not have happened."  It is now up to GM, he said, to submit a new restructuring and financing plan, as their previous one is out of date.  Schubert was adamant that this time "there will be no special treatment for Opel" and GM's plan would have to go through normal channels.   Matched by Threats from Organized Labor ---------------------------------------  4. (SBU) Klaus Franz, the head of Opel's Works Council, announced on November 4 that Opel's 25,000 employees in Germany will begin an indefinite strike on November 5 to protest the GM decision.  Franz called on all 55,000 Opel workers across Europe to join in.  Accusing GM of "blackmailing" governments and workers in Europe to sign on to its "unacceptable" restructuring Plan, he also revoked prior labor commitments to contribute 388 million dollars in foregone benefits to the Magna sale.  BERLIN 00001395  002.2 OF 002    5. (C) Oliver Burkhardt, head of the Metal Workers in NRW, likewise condemned the decision as "bold and unfriendly," not only to Opel employees, but to the German government. However, Burkhardt conceded that he is waiting to see a long term GM plan for Opel that relies on more than cost-cutting and down-sizing.  In contrast to Klaus Franz, Burkhardt contended that non-German labor unions were "elated" over the failure of the Magna deal (which was tilted against workers in other countries) and doubted they would heed Franz's strike call.  He also predicted that the strikes in Germany will be short-term and largely symbolic rather than actual closures, adding "we are not going to close the door on a solution with GM."  Similarly, Fred Irwin - Citigroup's country manager in Germany and the Chair of the Opel Trust that oversaw the Magna negotiations - predicted that unions will eventually reconcile with GM once they realize there is no other choice.   While Despair Permeates Opel Executives ---------------------------------------  6.  (C) Opel managers such as Berlin Representative Uwe Berlinghoff, who almost uniformly favored the Magna contract, were also "taken completely by surprise" by the GM announcement.  Berlinghoff now expects GM to resurrect its pre-Magna restructuring plans, including closure of plants at Bochum (and Antwerp, Belgium) and the sale or closure of the Eisenach plant.  Berlinghoff also expected the German government to cancel the expected 4.5 billion dollar loan guarantee package, as "GM has demonstrated its lack of credibility with German politicians."   Research and Development and IPR Could be Key ---------------------------------------------  7. (C) German auto industry insiders have privately identified compelling reasons why GM cancelled the Magna deal.  Among these are the importance of the GM/Opel Research and Development facility in Ruesselsheim and its patents to GM's development of small efficient cars in Europe, the U.S. and elsewhere.   GM was also reportedly skeptical that it could adequately protect crucial IPR from Russian exploitation because of the Sberbank/Gaz partnership with Magna.  Moreover, Magna had oversold its ability to penetrate the Russian market.  GM's announcement stressed its plans to build on its already significant business in Russia while retaining Opel and to work closely with Gaz without a Magna partnership.   But Auto Leader Welcomes the Move ---------------------------------  8.  (C) Dr. Norbert Reithofer, the CEO of BMW, told the Ambassador on November 4 that GM's move would be welcomed by the German auto industry.  Reithofer was adamant that there was no way BMW and the other German auto manufacturers would have purchased auto parts from Magna once it became a direct competitor as an auto manufacturer.  In Reithofer's view, Magna made the Opel purchase proposal in a moment of panic at the height of the economic crisis, but now that a recovery is in the offing, probably is not unhappy to see it dissolve.   Comment -------  9. (C) Despite the considerable German ire aimed at GM, much of it is aimed at GM's handling of Opel (in particular the timing of the November 3 announcement), rather than its business rationale for retaining its German subsidiary. Thoughtful German opinion leaders, including former Economics Minister zu Guttenberg conservatives in the German business community, were equally critical of Berlin's strong arm lobbying on behalf of Magna.  An Opel Trust Board Member and FDP politician Dirk Pfeil has already issued a statement urging Berlin to provide 3 billion Euro in state aid to keep GM afloat.  Like it or not, the German governments will need to seek an accommodation with GM to keep Opel alive.  MURPHY
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BERLIN 001403SIPDISDEPARTMENT FOR THE SECRETARY FROM THE AMBASSADORE.O. 12958: DECL: 11/05/2019TAGS: PGOV PREF MNUC AF RS IR KPAL KWBG GMSUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR SECRETARY CLINTON'S VISIT TOBERLIN, NOVEMBER 8-10 Classified By: Ambassador Phillip Murphy for reasons 1.4 (b,d).1. (C) Summary: Embassy Berlin warmly welcomes you toGermany for the historic 20th Anniversary of the Fall of theBerlin Wall. Berlin is hosting all four-powers and EUleaders at Berlin's Brandenburg Gate to mark this occasion.Your visit includes meetings with Chancellor Merkel andForeign Minister Westerwelle. Chancellor Merkel will likelyraise concern about General Motors' November 3 decision tokeep its German subsidiary, Opel, and Westerwelle may likelyraise his interest in removal of nuclear weapons fromGermany. You may wish to encourage from them:-- Assurances that the proposed Afghanistan conference willnot slip past January and that Germany will go immediately tothe Bundestag if increases in contributions are warranted;-- Support for including banking and insurance relations withIran in calculations for possible new sanctions, and nobacksliding on export controls;-- Assurances that Germany and the EU will work with the U.S.at Copenhagen and not seek to isolate;-- Agreement to tone down the public rhetoric on Opel;-- German prodding of Russia to engage constructively onsecurity issues and human rights.Recognizing Germany's prominent and international role onthis occasion is important to Merkel. She is still trying toget a sense of working with the new Washington Administrationand seems uncertain at times. Of course, Westerwelle islearning the ropes and being watched by Merkel to see if hecan be an effective FM for her. Alternatively, Merkel maylook to new Defense Minister zu Guttenberg (CSU) to play analternative role on foreign policy. End summary.Political Climate-----------------2. (C) The political divisions that marked the recentelection campaign, culminating in the October 28 swearing-inof a center-right coalition led by Chancellor Merkel, will beswept aside for your celebratory visit. Merkel just returnedfrom what she considers an exceptional visit to Washington,which front-paged her address to Congress in everypublication. Merkel will be focused on setting herpriorities for the next legislative term -- she gives a majorstate of the union-like address on November 10 on all issues-- and will seek U.S. cooperation in promoting economicrecovery and growth (Opel, regulation), progress inaddressing climate change (Copenhagen), and strengtheningGermany's international profile (Afghanistan). Westerwellewill have spent a total of some two days work in the foreignministry by the time your arrive. His ministry is not surewhat he wants yet.Economic Climate----------------3. (C) Germany's export-driven economy is showing initialsigns of recovery from its deepest recession since WW II.For the full year 2009, GDP will shrink around 5%, but shouldshow modest growth of 1% next year. Unemployment hasremained relatively low thanks to government-subsidizedprograms, but is expected to rise next year. Given thegovernment's record budget deficit, there is heated debateover the wisdom of the new coalition's proposed tax cuts,intended to boost growth. Germany was pleased with theoutcome of the G-20 Summit in Pittsburgh, but is keener onthe G-20's regulatory agenda than addressing globalimbalances.4. (C) GM's sudden decision on November 3 to cancel the saleof its European subsidiary Opel in a deal underwritten by theGerman government shocked and angered Germans. Merkel'schief economic advisor told the Ambassador November 4 thatMerkel was so furious at GM's about-face that she refused totake a call from GM CEO Fritz Henderson. Merkel subsequentlycalled the President. Federal and state governments aredemanding that GM immediately pay back 1.2 billion Euros inbridge loans they had extended to the car maker. Whatparticularly irked the Germans was that GM had failed toforewarn them of their latest flip-flop after months oflaborious negotiations and a total of 4.5 billion Euros inloans/guarantees in exchange for promises to retain most Opeljobs and plants in Germany. (Merkel found out about the GMdecision just hours after delivering her address beforeCongress.) The Opel story has dominated the news November4-5. Opel workers are likely to strike in the next few days,and politicians and others are citing the GM action asanother example of American "turbo-capitalism."Berlin 00001403 002 of 003Iran/Export Controls-----------------------5. (C) You should express appreciation for Merkel's strongstatement during her speech to Congress that there should be"zero tolerance" for Iranian acquisition of weapons of massdestruction. You should stress the importance of Germansupport for EU measures or measures taken by "like-minded"countries should a UNSCR be unattainable due to a possibleIranian rejection of the engagement track. With Westerwelle,it remains imperative that you raise the importance of P5 1unity again. In addition, you should stress the particularimportance of continued German leadership on export control,particularly in light of recent interdictions of Iranian armsshipments. The new German coalition seeks to expand exportsby normalizing German export control policy (of arms anddual-use items) with the EU. Germany contends that itsintention is to raise the EU to the German standard, but thedanger is that German standards could be watered down to anEU lowest common denominator.Arms Control/Disarmament------------------------6. (C) Westerwelle is on a bit of a tangent by publiclycalling for removal of nuclear weapons from Germany, althoughhe insists that Berlin will not act unilaterally. This getshim attention and he then offers assurances that everythingmust be done in the NATO context, but it distracts from otherissues. This is one of the few foreign policy positions thatdistinguishes his FDP from Chancellor Merkel's CDU, andWesterwelle may feel pressed to mention this. The MFAemphasizes that Westerwelle's position does not necessarilymean that Germany intends to cease participation in the NATOnuclear share. Germany may be willing to maintain its fleetof dual-capable aircraft, but have the applicable nuclearweapons stored in the U.S. or elsewhere. Westerwelle alsounderstands that some Allies may want to maintain theircurrent stock of NATO nuclear weapons. Your meeting withWesterwelle is a good opportunity to emphasize any red linesor concerns we have before this effort gets too far down theroad. For its part, the Chancellery, MFA and MOD areuncomfortable with Westerwelle's push and sees no reason totackle this issue right now.Afghanistan: Small Window for More Troops-----------------------------------------7. (C) FM Westerwelle has strongly defended Germanengagement in Afghanistan, both military and civilian, asvital to German national security interests. However, hesupports the Chancellor's recent decision to put off anyconsideration of deploying additional German soldiers untilafter the proposed international conference on Afghanistanearly next year, notwithstanding the significantlydeteriorated security situation in the north. The newgovernment sees theconference as critical for setting a new framework andbenchmarks for the international engagement in Afghanistan,as well as for prescribing what is expected of the Afghangovernment in return. It is in our interest to capitalize onthe Germans' sense of "ownership" of the north in getting acommitment from Westerwelle to seriously re-consider a troopincrease after the Afghanistan conference early next year,if, in fact, he and Merkel rule out any increase before then.Within this context, it would be important to acknowledgethat Germany is the fourth largest provider of civiliandevelopment assistance in Afghanistan and is an enthusiasticsupporter of the U.S. Focused District Development (FDD)civilian police training program, which it joined in Januaryof this year.Middle East-----------8. (C) You should thank Merkel for her strong statementsbefore Congress where she stressed the overarching importanceof Israel's security and a two-state solution. In general,Merkel has been very supportive of U.S. efforts in the MiddleEast. She is now planning the second round of German-Israeligovernment consultations, likely before the end of the year.She may raise this with you and seek your advice on messagesto Netanyahu. We understand that Westerwelle may also beplanning to visit Israel. The MFA said that Westerwelle mayseek a greater German role to promote peace, for example tooffer German support in coordinating Middle East policy withthe EU. According to the MFA, Westerwelle may also raise theconcept of creating some type of OSCE-like security structureBERLIN 00001403 003 of 003for the Middle East.Reluctance with Overseas Deployments------------------------------------9. (C) Germany continues to wrestle with the issue ofoverseas deployments. Westerwelle, and the FDP in general,tend to be more skeptical than Merkel's CDU on this topic andthis is reflected in the government coalition agreement. Thecoalition agreement calls for a "gradual reduction" of Germanparticipation in UNIFIL "with the perspective of bringing itto an end." Similarly, the agreement calls for a "criticalreview" of the "multitude" of parliamentary mandates for theBundeswehr to participate in counterterrorism and piracyoperations off the Horn of Africa, again with a view towardreducing them. It would be helpful for you to emphasize howimportant we view Germany's contributions to theseinternational operations.Russia/Energy Security----------------------10. (C) We expect Germany to be less forgiving of Russianbullying of its eastern European neighbors through cut-offsof natural gas supplies, especially given the departure offormer Foreign Minister Steinmeier -- known for hisrelatively pro-Russian views. Still, we expect Germany tocontinue to place a heavy emphasis on maintaining goodrelations with Russia, believing that constructive engagementand assistance with modernization are the best way to dealwith this difficult "strategic partner." Germany is Europe'slargest energy user and is highly dependent on Russia forenergy supplies, but Berlin does not view this as avulnerability, believing that Moscow is equally dependent onGermany as a consumer. Germany nevertheless recognizes thatit must diversify its sources of supply, routes, and means ofenergy generation to gain greater energy security.Climate Change--------------11. (C) As the Chancellor's remarks underline, Germanofficials want strong U.S. leadership going into theCopenhagen Summit. They are advocating for a unified US/EUposition towards the major emerging economies, particularlyChina and India, to urge them to commit to ambitious nationalactions at Copenhagen. They are looking for signals of ourcommitment to domestic and international actions that willallow us to collectively meet science-based targets. Germanleaders recognize the challenge of passing climate changelegislation in the U.S. and have lowered their expectationsfor the possibility of reaching a legally binding agreementnext month at Copenhagen. They have begun to describe theSummit as one step in a larger process -- a politicallybinding framework -- and may be preparing the German publicfor a less ambitious outcome.Mission Germany---------------12. (SBU) Madam Secretary, the U.S. government presence inGermany currently numbers 744 US direct-hire (USDH)employees, 683 locally engaged (LE) staff, and 951 USG EFMsand a State operating budget of $153 million annually. Thisincludes a Frankfurt cohort of over 500 USDH employees whoseresponsibilities support USG operations globally. Berlin'sUSG presence -- over 500 USDHs and LE staff -- is centered inthe new Chancery next to the Brandenburg Gate. The LE staffincludes many employees who have worked for the USG for over30 years. Mission Germany is on the cutting edge of using ITsolutions xxxxx.MURPHY
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BERLIN 001433  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/11/2019 TAGS: PREL MARR NATO MNUC PARM KNNP GM IR RU AFSUBJECT: NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISOR HEUSGEN ON AFGHANISTAN, MIDDLE EAST, IRAN, DETAINEES, RUSSIA, NUKES AND BALKANS  Classified By: AMBASSADOR PHILIP D. MURPHY. REASONS: 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1. (C) SUMMARY.  Chancellery National Security Advisor Christoph Heusgen told EUR A/S Phil Gordon and Ambassador Murphy in a November 10 meeting in Berlin that Germany strongly preferred that the proposed international conference on Afghanistan be held outside the country to make it easier to press Karzai to commit to the necessary reforms.  On the Middle East, Heusgen thought Netanyahu had to do much more on settlements if there was to be any hope of re-starting negotiations.  On Iran, Heusgen hoped for some conclusion by early next month on whether the diplomatic track was going to bear fruit so that this issue could be discussed at the December 10 EU Summit.  Heusgen said Germany was ready to discuss taking Guantanamo detainees, but stressed the importance of dealing directly with the Ministry of Interior and keeping the negotiations confidential.  While arguing for being rhetorically supportive of the Medvedev European Security proposal, Heusgen shared U.S. skepticism about a new treaty and an OSCE Summit hosted by Kazakhstan.  Heusgen distanced the Chancellery from the proposal to remove all remaining tactical nuclear weapons from Germany, stressing the need to get reciprocal cuts from the Russians.  Also discussed was CFE, the Macedonian name issue and Bosnia.  END SUMMARY.  AFGHANISTAN  2. (C) Heusgen confirmed that Germany would only announce additional resources for Afghanistan after the proposed international conference, which Chancellor Merkel and UK PM Brown are now proposing for January 28 in London.  He said the conference is key because this is where the Germans expect the Afghan government to make specific commitments to improve governance and to gradually begin assuming responsibility from the international community.  President Karzai had to be put under international pressure to perform according to prescribed benchmarks.  Toward that end, the Chancellery felt strongly that the conference should be held outside of Afghanistan and not on Karzai's "home turf." Heusgen complained that the German and U.S. embassies in Kabul are on "a different track" and pushing for a conference in Kabul.  It was important to "make up our minds" quickly on the way ahead.  If the conference slipped to February or later, and the UK were no longer able to host it in view of the upcoming parliamentary elections there, then Germany would be willing to.  3. (C) Heusgen at first expressed concern that the U.S. would undermine international leverage on Karzai by rolling out its new strategy and resource commitments before he made any reciprocal commitments to reform.  Gordon assured him that the formal U.S. roll-out would only come after the November 19 inauguration, where Karzai is expected to "say the right things" in his inaugural address.  Gordon also highlighted the need to coordinate on the U.S. roll-out to avoid the perception that the U.S. was "Americanizing" the international effort in Afghanistan.  It should be announced as a common strategy and not as a U.S. strategy to which the Allies then respond.  Heusgen agreed in principle, but indicated that Germany would stick to its approach of holding back on any announcement of new commitments until after the international conference.  MIDDLE EAST  4. (C)  Referring to the Secretary's recent public statements on settlements, Heusgen said that Germany "perceives this differently" and thought Netanyahu needed "to do more" in order bring the Palestinians to the negotiating table.  With Palestinians in East Jerusalem getting notices from Israeli authorities that their houses will be destroyed, it would be "suicide" for President Abbas to move under the current circumstances.  Heusgen said he could not fathom why Netanyahu did not understand this.  He suggested pressuring Netanyahu by linking favorable UNSC treatment of the Goldstone Report to Israel committing to a complete stop in settlement activity.  Gordon said that making a direct linkage between the two would almost certainly be counterproductive, but agreed that it was worth pointing out to the Israelis that their policy on settlements was making it difficult for their friends to hold the line in the UNSC. Heusgen said this certainly would be an issue when Netanyahu and "half of his cabinet" visit Berlin on November 30 for bilateral government consultations.  IRAN  5. (C) Heusgen praised the U.S. for its patience with Iran,  BERLIN 00001433  002 OF 003   but noted that at some point, it would be necessary to move to the second track in order to maintain credibility. Heusgen said that he and his British counterpart agreed that ideally, there would be some conclusion on this by early next month so that the way ahead could be discussed by EU leaders at their summit on December 10.  Gordon agreed that there had to be a time limit, noting that President Obama had given the Iranians "by the end of the year" to respond favorably.  He also noted that the U.S. could support a Turkish role in the proposed exchange of low-enriched uranium for reactor fuel if that would make it easier for Iran to accept the deal. Gordon indicated, however, that Turkish PM Erdogan needed to be careful about losing credibility in Washington if he continued to make comments about Ahmadinejad being his "friend."  GUANTANAMO DETAINEES  6. (C) Heusgen noted that now that the Bundestag election was past, Germany was ready to help on detainees, as it had promised earlier.  He advised the USG to work directly with new Interior Minister de Maiziere, rather than going first to MFA and the Chancellery, which had irritated de Maiziere's predecessor and made him less willing to cooperate.  In this regard, he thought that it would be helpful if DHS Secretary Napolitano made direct contact with de Maiziere.  Heusgen also suggested that the discussions be kept confidential until MOI had come to a decision on which detainees to accept and in which state they would be settled.  Premature public disclosure could doom the whole initiative.  Heusgen said that Uighurs would be "too difficult," but that Germany could probably accept "2-3 others."  (Comment: The reluctance about Uighurs is due to the expected negative reaction of the Chinese government.  End Comment.)  EUROPEAN SECURITY PROPOSAL AND POSSIBLE OSCE SUMMIT  7. (C) Heusgen said that while the West should try to react positively to whatever the Russians propose in advancing the Medvedev European security proposal, nothing should be accepted that would undermine current European security institutions, including the OSCE.  He shared Gordon's misgivings about a proposed treaty.  He was also skeptical about the idea of an OSCE Summit in Astana, agreeing that Kazakhstan's human rghts record and the lack of substantive agenda items made it unattractive.  Heusgen suggested that an OSCE Summit be offered to the Russians on the condition they solve the frozen conflict in Transnistria, which he said Moscow could accomplish "in about a month."  TACTICAL NUCLEAR WEAPONS  8. (C) In response to Gordon's question about how the government planned to take forward the commitment in the coalition agreement to seek the removal of all remaining nuclear weapons from Germany, Heusgen distanced the Chancellery from the proposal, claiming that this had been forced upon them by FM Westerwelle.  Heusgen said that from his perspective, it made no sense to unilaterally withdraw "the 20" tactical nuclear weapons still in Germany while Russia maintains "thousands" of them.  It would only be worth it if both sides drew down.  Gordon noted that it was important to think through all the potential consequences of the German proposal before going forward.  For example, a withdrawal of nuclear weapons from Germany and perhaps from Belgium and the Netherlands could make it very difficult politically for Turkey to maintain its own stockpile, even though it was still convinced of the need to do so.  CFE  9. (C) Gordon asked for Heusgen's views on a German CFE paper that had been delivered to the State Department just a few days earlier.  Heusgen said he did not know anything about it, claiming that he did not follow this issue closely or "believe in it."  He noted that MFA "loved this disarmament business," which was okay, but it had to be balanced or the "Russians will sit there and laugh."  MACEDONIAN NAME ISSUE  10. (C) Gordon briefed Heusgen on the current state of the negotiations, noting that the two key issues were the geographic modifier and international usage.  Heusgen noted that the Chancellor knew PM Macedonian Gruevski through their common membership in the European People's Party and would be willing to engage him on this issue if that would be helpful.  BOSNIA  BERLIN 00001433  003 OF 003    11. (C) Heusgen revealed that Serb President Tadic was coming to Berlin the week of November 16 for consultations.  He noted that while Tadic always claimed to be tough on Republika Srpska PM Dodic, he needed to be tougher.  While expressing pessimism about whether it would ever be possible to turn Bosnia into a "working state," Heusgen agreed it was important to keep trying. MURPHY
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BERLIN 001528  SIPDIS  TREASURY FOR OFAC SZUBIN, MONBORNE, MAHER JUSTICE FOR BRUCE SWARTZ USEU FOR CHASE, DODMAN, SNYDER STATE FOR S/ES-O, EUR/ERA, EUR/CE, L AND S/CT  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/02/2019 TAGS: PGOV PTER PREL KJUS KHLS GMSUBJECT: COALITION TESTED AS US-EU TFTP/SWIFT AGREEMENT PASSES ON GERMAN ABSTENTION  REF: A. BERLIN 1393      B. BERLIN 1377      C. BERLIN 1167  Classified By: DCM Greg T. Delawie for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1. (C) SUMMARY: German Federal Interior Minister Thomas de Maiziere overruled Justice Minister Sabine Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger and abstained from voting at the November 30 COREPER vote in Brussels on an interim U.S.-EU agreement to continue the Terrorist Finance Tracking Program.  De Maiziere's decision allowed the agreement to pass and followed weeks of engagement in Berlin, Brussels and Washington as well as high-level interventions from Secretary Clinton, Treasury Secretary Geithner, Attorney General Holder, National Security Advisor Gen. Jones and Ambassador Murphy.  De Maiziere's decision was difficult for him to make given that the coalition agreement called for specific revisions to the SWIFT agreement, none of which Germany achieved, except a shortening of the interim period from 12 to 9 months.  The episode has tested Germany's new coalition government just weeks after its formation with Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger heavily criticizing the abstention.  This experience suggests that we will need to pay close attention to Germany during our negotiations on a long-term TFTP agreement.  END SUMMARY   Germany Relents Following Intense Pressure ---------------   2. (C)  Ambassador Murphy met with Interior Minister de Maiziere on November 27 and urged him to support U.S.-EU negotiations on an interim TFTP agreement, to which de Maiziere indicated that he would abstain from voting on the agenda item at the November 30 COREPER meeting.  De Maiziere's decision, which followed a German request to shorten the duration of the interim agreement to nine months rather than twelve, facilitated the passing of the agreement as Germany was the strongest holdout.  De Maiziere's decision followed two weeks of intense lobbying in Berlin, Brussels and Washington by Embassy Berlin, USEU, the Departments of Treasury, State and Justice and the NSC.  The campaign included calls by Secretaries Clinton, Geithner, the Attorney General and the National Security Advisor to their German counterparts.  State Department Counterterrorism Coordinator Benjamin urged support for the agreement during a two-day visit to Berlin (see septel).  Ambassador Murphy twice wrote to all five relevant ministers (Interior, Justice, Finance, Chancellery, and MFA) and made repeated calls to senior decision makers, stressing the importance of the interim agreement and the need for Germany to not block it.  The DCM, Econ M/C, and staff from multiple embassy sections heavily engaged on the issue as well.   3. (C)  De Maiziere (CDU) stressed that his decision was not an easy one given that the Christian Democrat/Social Union (CDU/CSU) and Free Democratic Party (FDP) coalition had differing views on the TFTP program.  The outcome particularly irritated Justice Minister Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger because she had expressed concerns about the TFTP dating back to the initial July decision to give the negotiating mandate to the Swedish EU Presidency.  Furthermore, in October Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger had inserted language into the CDU/CSU-FDP coalition agreement specifically addressing the TFTP negotiations and directing Germany to call upon the EU to work towards a higher level of data protection (see Ref B).  Following de Maiziere's decision, the Justice Minister complained that her views were ignored and that the decision has "upset millions of citizens of Europe."  De Maiziere told the Ambassador that he would be expressing some criticisms of the agreement publicly in order to reflect MoI concerns and to deflect public criticism.  He was subsequently quoted as saying that "a not completely satisfactory agreement is better than none at all."   BERLIN 00001528  002 OF 002    German Vote Comes with Costs for the Coalition ----------   4. (C) De Maiziere intimated, and working level contacts have confirmed, that Germany would like to avoid a repeat of our all-out lobbying effort during the negotiations for a long-term TFTP agreement.  De Maiziere's strong preference is to seek consensus with his ministry colleagues.  He particularly wants to avoid another clash with the Justice Minister on this issue as it has caused no small amount of discord between the new coalition partners, who are having a rocky start on a number of fronts.  The incident is particularly difficult for de Maiziere as he entered the Interior Ministry stressing that he represented a break from his predecessor Wolfgang Schaeuble, whom he felt overly focused on security issues (see Ref A).  De Maiziere surely finds this whole experience regrettable as it put him in exactly the position he did not want to be in: seemingly siding with the U.S. over German interests, causing disruption within the coalition, and compromising the data privacy rights of German citizens.   Engaging the FDP on Data Privacy ---------   5. (C) It is not altogether surprising that this disagreement arose given the FDP's reputation as a staunch defender of citizens' privacy rights (see Ref C).  Nevertheless, the intensity of this dispute should be a wake up call - we must avoid repeating this as we look to completing the long-term U.S.-EU TFTP agreement.  The coalition agreement calls for strict limitations on the use of TFTP data, no automatic access to the system, data deletion requirements, clear rules on sharing information with third parties and legal redress. These positions will guide Germany's views in the follow-on negotiations, and we need to consider how to take them into account in a way that does not complicate TFTP implementation.  6. (C) Embassy Berlin is examining how we can reach out to FDP ministers and parliamentarians to educate them on U.S. data protection structures as this experience has demonstrated that they are often misinformed on the nature of our policies.  We will likewise reach out to CDU/CSU decision makers, in part to enlist their help in reaching the German public.  We also intend to make the point that countering terrorism in a globalized world, where terrorists and their supporters use open borders and information technology to quickly move people and financing, requires robust international data sharing. MURPHY
C O N F I D E N T I A L BERLIN 001548  NOFORN SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO S/GC MICHAEL WILLIAMS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/07/2019 TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM PTER GMSUBJECT: GERMANY RENEWS CONSIDERATION OF GUANTANAMO DETAINEES FOR RESETTLEMENT  REF: A. STATE 50242      B. BERLIN 600      C. BERLIN 625  Classified By: Ambassador Philip D. Murphy for reasons 1.4 (b,d).  1.  (C/NF) Summary: In separate December 1 meetings with Ambassador Dan Fried, Special Envoy for Closure of the Guantanamo Bay Detention Facility (S/GC), the Ministry of the Interior, Foreign Ministry and Chancellery expressed a willingness to consider seven new cases of Guantanamo detainees for resettlement as well as three cases that had already been provided to the former government last spring. All interlocutors stressed that the MOI is the competent ministry handling this issue.  They also expressed the desire to be helpful in the spirit of the strong U.S.-German bilateral relationship.  Interior Ministry State Secretary Beus said that any decision on the cases would likely take up to two months and agreed with S/E Fried on the following way forward:  -- the Interior Ministry would be the only ministry addressing this issue, especially in regard to sharing information on the detainees; -- the U.S. and Germany will uphold strict confidentiality during this review phase and coordinate timing and content of any public messages; -- while Germany prefers non-Uighur cases because of expected tension with China, it will consider the cases of two Uighurs based on humanitarian grounds; -- Germany prefers to accept detainees with a connection to Germany, which S/E Fried explained to be the case with only one detainee, a Tunisian whose file was previously provided; -- the German MOI will maintain direct communication with S/GC at this stage in the process; -- Germany will decide on the need to interview any candidates at the end of its review process.  In a later meeting, Chancellery Security Advisor Christoph Heusgen stressed his confidence in Interior Minister Thomas de Maiziere to handle this issue, noting de Maiziere's close relationship with Chancellor Merkel.  End summary.  Interior Ministry is Key ------------------------  2.  (C/NF) Based on a schedule recommended by the Chancellery, S/E Fried and Ambassador Murphy met first with Interior Ministry State Secretary Beus and expressed appreciation for the new government's willingness to consider resettling detainees.  S/E Fried reviewed the numerous European countries which had accepted or pledged to resettle detainees at this point, noting that progress has been made but more is needed.  He noted he would only be passing along detainee dossiers to the MOI and discussing case specifics with the MOI, and not with other Government ministries, per earlier requests from the government.  S/E Fried handed over the dossiers of seven detainees: two Egyptians, two Syrians, a Libyan, and two Palestinians.  He explained that if the MOI has questions or requires additional information, it can do so through established liaison channels and additionally offered for a German team to visit Guantanamo to conduct interviews with detainees under consideration.  While recognizing Germany's preference for non-Uighur detainees, S/E Fried raised two Uighur cases for consideration based on humanitarian grounds, one who has psychological problems and the other, his brother, who serves as a caregiver.  He also acknowledged the German interest in detainees who have some connection to Germany, noting the one Tunisian case whose file had been conveyed last spring as the single detainee with those ties to Germany.  In total, S/E Fried requested that Germany consider 10 detainee cases for resettlement, three cases already conveyed and seven new cases.  3.  (C/NF) State Secretary Beus expressed his ministry's willingness to consider all the cases, including the Uighurs, and said that his experts would review the files as soon as possible.  Shortly after he began, Interior Minister Thomas de Maiziere dropped in to stress his desire to be of help. Continuing, Beus underlined the importance of keeping the current discussions and review of the detainees confidential, to which S/E Fried strongly agreed.  Beus underlined Germany's preference for detainees who have some ties to Germany, noting that this connection would provide the government with a "plausible" explanation for accepting certain detainees when faced with the argument that the U.S. should be resettling them.  Beus said that he would be willing to consider the two Uighur cases on humanitarian grounds, but noted that they would present special difficulties because of the diplomatic row which would likely  ensue.  Beus also highlighted that even if the federal government agrees to accept any detainees, it must then find a German state willing to accept them.  He also said that German services would naturally keep an eye on any resettle detainees within reasonable resource means.  4.  (C/NF) Beus also expressed strong interest in coordinating the timing and content of any public message on Germany's consideration of and decision on resettling detainees to prevent political pressure from those who oppose the move, but regardless the government will advocate in public in favor of taking detainees if they come to a positive decision.  He added that being able to say to the public that the U.S. has also accepted detainees or otherwise explain why the U.S. is not doing so would also be helpful. S/E Fried expressed his readiness to coordinate and noted that the U.S. has admitted and plans to admit the more dangerous detainees for legal proceedings.  Process and Timeframe ---------------------  5.  (C/NF) Beus said that he and his experts would review the files and determine if additional information is needed.  He agreed that additional information would go through intelligence channels and expressed his preference to communicate directly with S/E Fried on any matters at this stage of the process.  He said that they would decide whether interviews are necessary when the experts have completed their review of the information.  He estimated that a decision on taking detainees would take one-to-two months.  MFA Plays Peripheral Role -------------------------  6.  (C/NF) It was clear from the later meeting with MFA State Secretary Wolf Born that the Foreign Office would not be a major decision-maker as on this issue.  S/E Fried reviewed in general terms the cases of detainees that we are asking the MOI to consider and also highlighted the humanitarian nature of the two Uighur cases, which Born noted.  Born said that Foreign Minister Westerwelle wants to be "positive," but added that it is the MOI which is the "competent" ministry on this issue.  Born mainly asked questions about the numbers of detainees still at Guantanamo, U.S. plans for addressing the various groups, and the possible closing date, all of which S/E Fried discussed with him.  Chancellery Confirms Reticence about Uighurs --------------------------------------------  7.  (C/NF) In the last meeting, Chancellery Security and Foreign Policy Advisor Christoph Heusgen expressed appreciation that S/E Fried had proceeded along the lines that the MOI and Chancellery had requested through Ambassador Murphy.  Heusgen appeared to be already fully briefed on S/E Fried's earlier meeting that day with Beus.  He told S/E Fried that if Germany were to take any Uighurs, it would be best to do so in combination with other European countries to prevent China from focusing its opposition on any one country.  Heusgen was not optimistic that China would demonstrate any understanding for the two humanitarian cases.  Heusgen inquired as to whether any alternatives for the Uighurs exists.  S/E Fried explained possible options, while highlighting the difficulty of resettling the two individuals he is asking Germany to consider.  Comment -------  8.  (C/NF) The new government, now in place since October 29, appears willing to renew consideration of resettling GTMO detainees and has expressed a clear desire to be of help.  In contrast to former Interior Minister Schaeuble, current MOI de Maiziere has not (and is unlikely to) flouted security concerns about cases in the press, nor indicated that Germany would be hardpressed to accept any detainees put forth for security reasons.  Nor has de Maiziere indicated that the fact that the U.S. itself has not resettled detainees presents an insurmountable roadblock, although Beus indicated that U.S. resettlement would help Germany's PR efforts to resettle.  All interlocutors expressed a strong interest in keeping the matter confidential and coordinating the timing and content of any public message.  Beus projected sincerity and realism, noting that even if the federal government agrees, it must still identify a state that is willing to resettle the detainees.  While all interlocutors did not outright reject the two Uighur cases, Heusgen made clear that the prospect of being the only European country to irritate China by accepting Uighurs would make it difficult, although  it is unclear whether Germany would take part in any broader European decision to resettle Uighurs.  9. (SBU) There has to date been no mention in the press of S/E Fried's visit.  10.  (U) This cable has been cleared by S/E Dan Fried. MURPHY
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BERLIN 001577  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/15/2019 TAGS: PGOV PREL KNNP ETTC EFIN IR GMSUBJECT: NOW FOR THE HARD PART: MERKEL,S TEAM EXAMINES NEXT STEPS IN IRAN  Classified By: Ambassador Philip D. Murphy for reasons 1.4 b/d.  1.  (C) SUMMARY.  Chancellor Merkel set the German agenda on Iran with her early November statement before the U.S. Congress on "zero tolerance" for a nuclear armed Iran and the need for tougher sanctions should engagement not work. During a private roundtable hosted by Ambassador Murphy, however, members of Germany's Iran "brain-trust" from the German Parliament, MFA, Ministry of Economics and top government funded think tank welcomed the President's engagement policy, recommended broadening the dialogue to areas of cooperation (drugs, Afghanistan, diplomatic relations), betrayed little beyond a superficial knowledge of the nuclear program, argued that Germany took the largest economic hit from recent sanctions, and expressed doubts as to the efficacy of sanctions, giving us a window into the difficult task Chancellor Merkel will have in keeping her government on her page.  In the end, we assess that Merkel will have her way. END SUMMARY.  2.  (C) The November 24 event at the Embassy included members of Parliament from the four main German political parties: FDP Elke Hoff, CDU Andreas Schockenhoff, Greens Kerstin Mueller, and SPD Rolf Muetzenich.  From the MFA, Policy Planner Markus Ederer, DG for Economics Ruediger von Fritsch, DG for Disarmament and Nonproliferation Amb. Peter Gottwald, and Iran Task Force Director Andreas Krueger attended. Ministry of Economics DG for External Economic Policy Karl-Ernst Brauner and the Director of the German government funded research institute Stiftung fuer Wissenschaft und Politik (SWP, or Institute for Science and Politics) Volker Perthes also attended.  ----------------------------------------- MFA: TRR Not Dead Yet; But Not Well Either -----------------------------------------  3.  (C) The Ambassador opened the discussion by thanking the German government for its excellent cooperation on Iran and asked his guests to share their thoughts on the Iranian internal situation, especially given recent reports of the expanded role of the IRGC in the cultural/educational spheres of life, and how that might affect Iran's external policy. MFA DG for Disarmament Gottwald stated that if we were correct in assessing the Iranian regime's primary goal to be survival, then we still had a chance with a negotiated solution.  He said that while the Tehran Research Reactor (TRR) deal was not "well," Germany wasn't ready to pronounce it "dead" quite yet.  He concluded with a strong statement saying that a nuclear armed Iran would be a nightmare in and of itself and a disastrous blow to the NPT regime which was why Germany would be a strong partner in support of further sanctions.  4.  (C) MFA Policy Planer Ederer said he thought Iran was confused about what it wants and that the West might be even more confused about how to get what we want.  He said we want Iranian behavior change, but we don't agree yet what will get us there.  He said UN sponsored sanctions would isolate Iran and limit its capacity, but questioned whether they would change Tehran's behavior.  He said he realized sanctions remained a good alternative to military action, but questioned whether they were really capable of anything other than just buying time.  ------------------------------------------ More Carrots before we Reach for the Sticks ------------------------------------------  5.  (C) SWP's Perthes argued Iranian Supreme Leader Khamenei's primary interest was to maintain the security of the system and prevent regime change.  Perthes said Khamenei feared a velvet revolution over all else, though regional instability was a close second.  He noted Iran remained besieged by problems of drug smuggling, piracy, and instability in Pakistan.  He recommended more emphasis be placed on trying to find an incentive for the regime to cooperate on the regional track, which had already shown some progress.  He said the April 2009, 300 million dollar Iranian pledge at the Pakistan donor's conference was an important symbol of the value the regime placed on regional security. He suggested the West "broaden" relations with Iran to areas where cooperation could be had: drugs, Afghanistan, and diplomatic (especially Consular) ties.  POL M/C noted this was fine, but ignored the fact that time was not on our side.  Rather, Iran was installing new centrifuges each week.  If Iran wanted to build confidence or "broaden" relations, it could modulate that pace, but time was not a luxury we had. Gottwald agreed emphatically.  BERLIN 00001577  002 OF 003    6.  (C) Changing course, Perthes said that if "sticks" had to be used, he suggested more focus on "export-control" and less on sanctions. He noted evidence suggested export control regimes had already worked in slowing down centrifuge progress.  He concluded by saying that if sanctions must be used, we should avoid all use of the word "crippling" and instead focus on "targeted" sanctions in order not to turn the Iranian masses against us and right back into Ahmadinejad's hands.  He also suggested that "unofficial" sanctions such as Russia's decision not to sell the S300s were more effective than most formal sanctions.  If formal sanctions had to be pursued he said only global sanctions would be effective, and therefore advocated UNSC action. Perthes said he saw readiness in the German business community to accept financial loss if sanctions were truly global, but they don't want to see business opportunities being lost to China or India.  --------------------------------------------- ---- Green Party : Too Late to Prevent, Need To Contain --------------------------------------------- ----  7.  (C) From the opposition, Green Party Foreign Policy Spokesperson Kerstin Mueller said she was glad that the new U.S. administration no longer talked about a threat of a military option.  But she also said she was skeptical that Iran can be prevented from obtaining a nuclear capability without a military option, and that it might even be too late for a military option to be effective.  She said she didn't see compromise within the interests of the regime and thought the West should focus more attention on how to "control" a nuclear-armed Iran.  ------------------------------------------- FDP: Rank and File Grudging Partner on Iran? --------------------------------------------  8.  (C) FDP Spokeswoman on Defense Policy, Elke Hoff opened her remarks with a grudging acknowledgment of the coalition agreement in which her party agreed that if engagement with Iran on the nuclear dossier failed, sanctions would be implemented.  She added that she remained personally skeptical as to their efficacy.  She said additional sanctions would serve the unintended consequence of rallying the masses around Ahmadinejad.  9.  (C) Hoff said she often hears from constituents in the business community that German companies are getting pressured from their American counterparts not to do business in Iran, and yet they see plenty of U.S. products for sale in Iran. Econ M/C intervened and stressed that the U.S. was ready to prosecute any U.S. businesses in violation of U.S. sanctions and had already done so.  Hoff also suggested offering German businesses financial compensation should new sanctions come into play.  In response to a criticism from Hoff on whether the U.S. deadline created for engagement on Iran reflected Obama's domestic political agenda, the Ambassador emphasized the deep commitment of the administration to engagement.  ---------------------------- Germany is the Largest Loser ----------------------------  10.  (C) MFA DG for Economics Von Fritsch agreed with Perthes' suggestion to focus more on the carrots and not the sticks.  He noted that no single country has (recently) sacrificed as much financially as Germany has, not just in existing trade, but also in long term future contracts.  Econ M/C noted that U.S. business had also suffered enormous trade and investment losses after 1979.  Von Fritsch said if sanctions were inevitable, German business preferred global and clear sanctions as opposed to vague wording that can be left open to differing interpretations.  On correspondent banking relations, Von Fritsch said the German government was still examining the issue but that a complete severance of correspondent banking relations including with Iran's central bank would not be possible since it would amount to a total trade embargo.  11.  (C) Ministry of Economics DG for External Policy Brauner referenced the inclusion in German law of the presumptive right to trade, and said that he was concerned that what the German Customs and BAFA (export control agency under the Ministry of Economics) were doing to encourage "Nullbescheid" (pre-certification that specific trade with Iran is not illicit) might actually be illegal, as German business had complained.  He said one important consideration for Germany  BERLIN 00001577  003 OF 003   was that a further crackdown on trade with Iran could endanger repayment of the 4.5 billion Euros in outstanding credits that Iran owed Germany. Germany had agreed not to issue any new credit under its Hermes (OPIC-like) program, but expected to be able to collect on outstanding credits. Nonetheless, both Brauner and Von Fritsch emphasized that in the event of no progress in negotiations with Iran, Germany was ready to enter a new round of stronger sanctions, and that we should look to Chancellor Merkel's statements in the U.S. Congress and FM Westerwelle's reiterations of her strong policy as the final say on which direction Germany would go on Iran.  12.  (C) CONCLUSION.  The majority of the guests at the table distinctly deferred to Perthes for guidance on where the Iran issue might be headed or should be headed.  This was striking amongst such a high ranking group of people operationally involved with the Iran issue.  Also illuminating was the variety of talking points employed by the participants to define hurdles for sanction until debunked one at a time by Embassy officers.  The candor with which even some MFA and Ministry of Economics officials expressed their skepticism on the efficacy of pursuing tougher sanctions on Iran may mean that Merkel will have to press hard within her own government to deliver on her promise of implementing tougher sanctions should engagement with Iran fail.  None of our interlocutors, however, questioned whether Merkel would, at the end of the day, be able to "deliver" on her promises.  If and when we decide to go forward on the pressure track on Iran, the USG may wish to reinforce Merkel's position by showing appreciation for Germany's strong continuing support.  END CONCLUSION. MURPHY
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BERLIN 001609  SENSITIVE  STATE FOR EEB/IFD/ODF (LEATHAM, ALEXANDER), SCA/A (BRADY), NEA/IPA (LENTZ), EUR/CE (HODGES, SCHROEDER) TREASURY FOR SMART, ICN (NORTON), IMB, OASIA SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID ECON EFIN PGOV PREL GMSUBJECT: GERMANY'S NEW DEVELOPMENT MINISTER CONNECTS DEVELOPMENT WITH SECURITY POLICY  BERLIN 00001609  001.3 OF 002   1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Dirk Niebel (FDP) was an odd pick as Germany's new Development Minister -- he had no experience in international development, and had previously suggested abolishing the Development Ministry.  Now in charge, Niebel has big shoes to fill, following on the heels of Heidemarie Wieczorek-Zeul (SPD).  Important differences with his predecessor are already apparent: he would like to integrate Germany's development policy more closely with its foreign and security policy, including in Afghanistan.  Niebel is also a firm believer in free markets, and sees a successful conclusion of the Doha Development Round as critical for developing countries.  For Niebel, nothing is sacrosanct: he intends to phase out German aid to China, which he regards as no longer a developing country.  With the ministry under new management, there may be additional opportunities for collaboration between the United States and Germany on development policy.  END SUMMARY.  DIRK WHO? ---------  2.  (SBU) Dirk Niebel struck many as an unlikely choice for Development Minister in the coalition government of Chancellor Merkel's Christian Democratic Union (CDU)/Christian Social Union (CSU) and Guido Westerwelle's Free Democratic Party (FDP) (the "Black-Yellow" coalition). A Hamburg native, Niebel's previous work experience includes eight years as a paratrooper in the German armed forces, and five years as a placement officer at a job center in Heidelberg.  In 1998, he was elected to the Bundestag (lower house of Parliament), where he became caucus spokesperson for labor market policy and a member of the Labor Committee.  In 2005, FDP Chairman (and current Foreign Minister) Westerwelle tapped him as FDP Secretary General -- a position he held until Chancellor Merkel appointed him Development Minister in November 2009.  As Secretary General, Niebel had called for the elimination of the ministry he would later head, the Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ). (NOTE: This option appears off the table for now. END NOTE) Niebel succeeds Heidemarie Wieczorek-Zeul of the Social Democratic Party (SPD), who headed BMZ for a record 11 years.   CONNECTED SECURITY ------------------  3.  (SBU) In a December 18 meeting with Ambassador Murphy, Niebel said he intended to "make some changes at BMZ."  One such change is linking development policy more closely with foreign and security policy -- a concept he referred to as "connected security."   Niebel told the Ambassador he planned to coordinate very closely with Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle, and that he foresaw much greater cooperation between BMZ and the German military in northern Afghanistan. (NOTE: Days prior to the meeting with Ambassador Murphy, Niebel had announced BMZ would increase civilian assistance to Afghanistan by around 50 million euros, bringing Germany's 2009 total to over 260 million euros. END NOTE)  4. (SBU) In a separate meeting several months ago, Chancellery National Security Advisor Christoph Heusgen had told us that BMZ under a Black-Yellow coalition would be less wedded to "old" notions of doing development work.  This assessment now appears to be accurate.   Wiezcorek-Zeul had ensured that German development staff worked and lived in separate compounds, away from provincial reconstruction teams (PRTs) and other bases from which the Ministry of Defense, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Interior operated.  She even refused to ride in German military vehicles when she visited Afghanistan.  This kind of separation seems likely to end under Niebel, both physically and substantively.  5. (SBU) Among other ideas Niebel brings to the table is a plan to partner with third country donors like Israel on projects in developing countries.  Niebel told the Ambassador that Israel,s expertise in border protection could be shared  BERLIN 00001609  002.3 OF 002   with African countries, for example.  By teaming up with Germany, Israel could participate in certain capacity building projects where it might not otherwise have access.  LAISSEZ-FAIRE DEVELOPMENT -------------------------  6. (SBU) Shortly after becoming Minister, Niebel remarked that his overall development philosophy was helping recipient countries help themselves.  He regards the successful conclusion of World Trade Organization's (WTO's) Doha Development Round as especially meaningful for developing countries.  "There is more money being lost by trade barriers than all the development aid can make up for," he said.  This perspective marks a noteworthy departure from the approach of Wieczorek-Zeul, dubbed "red Heide" for her affiliation with the Young Socialists years ago.  7. (SBU) Niebel also opposes a proposed tax on international financial transactions to fund development assistance.  Both Chancellor Merkel and Wieczorek-Zeul had championed the so-called "Tobin tax."  Citing "differences" within the government on the issue, Niebel has reportedly ended BMZ's participation in an international working group on the proposed tax.  8.  (SBU) Niebel is keen to reorient BMZ's assistance. Reflecting on comments made publicly in his first days as Minister, Niebel told Ambassador Murphy that Germany planned to stop providing development assistance to China, currently one of the largest recipients of German aid.  He added that China was "only a developing country when it came to climate change negotiations."  BMZ will carry out its existing aid obligations to China only through next year.  The decision has proved controversial, as BMZ's assistance to China had reportedly benefitted German companies doing business there.  TRAVEL PLANS ------------  9. (SBU) Niebel said he planned to spend the holidays in Israel.  (NOTE: Niebel is a long-standing member of the German-Israeli Society. END NOTE) His first official travel to the developing world will be a late January trip to "Rwanda, eastern Congo, Mozambique, Afghanistan and Asia." The Ambassador suggested Niebel visit Washington to meet with new USAID Administrator Shah once confirmed.  Niebel said he would coordinate dates for the visit with the Embassy.  COMMENT -------  10. (SBU) Niebel takes charge of BMZ at a challenging time: Germany will run its largest post-war deficit in 2010, and pressure to rein in spending will strain every ministry. Niebel's close relationship with Westerwelle should be an asset, however, and could help minimize cuts on key priorities.  The close relationship will also facilitate Niebel's vision of integrating development policy with foreign and security policy.  Since taking over at BMZ, Niebel has increased assistance to Afghanistan, where Germany was already the third largest donor, and appears open to doing more in support of an integrated strategy in the north.  An early meeting between the new USAID Administrator, who oversees the world's largest aid budget, and the new German Development Minister, who oversees the world's second largest, could be an important step in building stronger U.S.-German cooperation on our top development priorities. DELAWIE
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 BERLIN 001626  STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A  VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA  "PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE"  SIPDIS  E.0. 12958: N/A TAGS: OPRC KMDR KGHG US IR CH USSUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TERRORISM, IRAN, CHINA, U.S.;BERLIN  1.    Lead Stories Summary 2.   (U.S.)   Failed Terrorist Attack 3.   (Iran)   New Protestsn4 4.   (China)   Reaction to Jailing of Liu Xiabo 5.   (U.S.)   Healthcare Reform   1.   Lead Stories Summary  The majority of dailies opened with reports on the failed terror attack on a Delta Airlines jet, while Sueddeutsche headlined: "Protests Intensify - Riots in Iran" and FAZ led with the headline:  "People Killed in Demonstrations in Iran."  Editorials focused on the failed terror attack in the U.S., with the unrest in Iran and with the state of the coalition government in Berlin.  ZDF-TV's early evening  newscast heute and ARD-TV's early evening newscast Tagesschau opened  with a report on violent clashes between the Iranian regime and opponents.  2.   (U.S.)   Failed Terrorist Attack  All papers carry extensive reports the failed terrorist attack on a  Delta Airlines airliners and reported that travelers flying to the United States must expect heightened security measures and tougher restrictions on their flights to the United States.  Die Welt headlined: "Terror Attempt Stirring up fear of Terror," while Financial Times headlined: "Fear of Terror is Back."  In a front-page editorial, Die Welt (12/28) judged: "The fact that the would-be attacker was able to board a plane with his dangerous material reveals gaps in the control system.  With metal detectors alone chemical explosives cannot be discovered."  Under the headline: "Flight 253," Frankfurter Allgemeine (12/28) opined: "If someone really had believed that we have transnational terror under control, and that we can give an all-clear signal with  respect to security, then those people have now been taught better.  Irrespective of whether the attacker acted on his own or on the instructions of al-Qaida, the danger is not over and that is why travelers, not only to the Untied States, must accept new inconveniences which are hopefully useful."  "Following the terror attempt in Detroit, the usual security debate  will now begin," Frankfurter Rundschau (12/28) noted, and added: "controls will be heightened, and agencies are trying to get us to do everything possible to prevent another attack.  This failed terror attempt shows how unpredictable people can be who stop at nothing.  For the time being, there is only one lesson we can learn from the events on Flight 253: It is the courageous effort of Jasper Schuringa who prevented even worse events.  The unexpected resolve of individuals can be the right answer to the threat that comes out of  the blue."  In the view of Stuttgarter Zeitung (12/28), "Abdulmutallab was miles   BERLIN 00001626  002 OF 005   away from the organizational level of the 9/11 attackers.  But the Nigerian national succeeded in one thing:  he totally unnerved the western world, and the terror fighting machinery of the United States in particular.  Even though the U.S. government knew about the danger of the young man, he was able to fly around the world without difficulty.  Almost without any problems, he was able to smuggle dangerous substances aboard an aircraft.  But what if he really had  the order from al-Qaida in Yemen to blow up the plane?  How does this view then fit the U.S. focus on Afghanistan?  Is Yemen, too, a front  in the anti-terror war?  Many question, but only a few answers."  Regional daily Nrnberger Nachrichten (12/28) and regional daily Trierischer Volksfreund (12/28) judged: "How was it possible for a young man to get aboard with a one-way ticket and an Arabic sounding  name, whose contacts with Islamic extremists were known and whose father even warned the U.S. embassy?  The lists of passengers travelling to the United States are transferred in advance to the U.S. Homeland Security Department with all its data bases.  But again we  see a big hole in the net that is supposed to capture potential terrorists.  Of course, one hundred percent security will never exist, but these gaps are dramatic and should be an alarm call which politicians should not ignore."  Mannheimer Morgen (12/28) warned against hysteria and judged: "Each  day terror investigators receive hundreds of tips and indications.  How is it then possible to follow a vague suspicion?  We should not  exaggerate security measures for flights.  The fact that in the United States no one is allowed to go to the bathroom one hour before landing is ridiculous.  The same is true for the ban on liquids in Europe.  Here there is a clear disproportion between cost and benefit." MQrkische Allgemeine of Potsdam (12/28) opined: "If airlines, as a reaction to the failed attempt, force their passengers to remain seated one hour before landing, then this is no more than a gesture of helplessness.  The second much more important aspect may be dissatisfying at the moment, but there is no way around it: Muslims  must preach again and again in their own ranks that terror is not the culmination of piety but a crime.  Any incident like this should stress to the Muslim world how urgent this message is."  Regional daily Westdeutsche Zeitung of Dsseldorf (12/28) observed:  "Hectic measure such as barring passengers from getting up should not prevail in the long run.  In the future, there will be no way around  finding the right balance between possible improvements of our security standards compared to the trouble caused by them."SchwarzwQlder Bote (12/28) noted: "Everything we have learned  about this attack does not strengthen our confidence in international  BERLIN 00001626  003 OF 005   security measures.  It is certainly right that there cannot be absolute security from mean terrorist attacks but this does not the  least excuse the gaps in anti-terror measures.  3.   (Iran)   New Protests  All papers carry extensive coverage of the new clashes between the regime and opposition forces in Iran.   Sueddeutsche headlined: "Protests Intensify - Riots in Iran" and FAZ led with the headline:  "People Killed in Demonstrations in Iran."  Frankfurter Rundschau reported on its front page: "The protests are directed against Iranian President Ahmadinejad."  The paper also reported that "according to  reports from Tehran, police officers partly disobeyed orders to use  their guns against the protesters.  The Internet page "Jaras," which  is critical of the government, reported that 'some [police officers]  tried to fire their guns in the air when their superiors put pressure on them.'"  Sueddeutsche Zeitung (12/28) said in an editorial under the headline: "There is Growing Unrest among the People" that "if the information  fragments from Tehran on the demonstrations during the Ashura holidays allow one conclusion, then this one: the rank and file of the protests are now overtaking their leaders.  Posters of religious leader Ali Khamenei and the chorus of demonstrators who want to see the dictator dead do not correspond with the slogans of the two opposition leaders Moussawi and Charrubi.  They are now faced with a dilemma:  If they  stick to their view that they, in principle, recognize the institutions of the Islamic republic and want to use the courts to make their political opposition heard, then it could be that their followers will leave them because many want something else: regime change."  Regional daily Suedwest Presse of Ulm (12/28) editorialized: "The regime is using all its might to extinguish the massive protests. The few Internet reports in any case show the brutality of the leading clique around President Ahmadinejad.  In the meantime, the regime has its back to the wall.  The protests are no longer confined to Tehran  but are spreading to other cities....  The government can no longer  afford the good deeds with which it bought the loyalty of Iranians.  All this is really worrying for the international community of nations."  Ostsee Zeitung of Rostock (12/28) argued: "Despite jammed cellular phone networks and despite blocked access to the Internet, the unrest in Iran hardly seems to be stoppable.  The resistance is still limited to a well-educated cosmopolitan, young, urban middle class.  Large sectors of the population, however, seem to keep quiet or seem to  BERLIN 00001626  004 OF 005   support the regime.  But the cyber revolt in Tehran has demonstrated  that the mullahs no longer enjoy a monolithic power."  Regional daily Dresdner Neueste Nachrichten (12/28) opined: "Since the allegedly manipulated re-election of President Ahmadinejad, a state of emergency has dominated in Iran.  But this is not only the struggle of a limited political protest movement against the president and the ayatollahs behind him.  The country is now facing an endurance test.  At issue is whether the country wants to become a fundamental religious state or an Islamic republic.   The pictures from Iran are  shocking.  It is the violence on both sides that makes us fear the worst."  4.   (China)   Reaction to Jailing of Liu Xiabo  Frankfurter Allgemeine (12/28) editorialized under the headline: "Co- Responsibility," that foreign countries must also be blamed that a man like Liu Xiabo is jailed with such an absurdly high prison term. The foreign countries have treated China for economic considerations with political kid gloves for years.  We can't blame China under these circumstances because we think that it is unassailable?  A positive  reaction to any criticism of the verdict cannot be expected."  Sueddeutsche Zeitung (12/28) said in an editorial: "A subtle but clearly visible trend is getting hold in China.  Civil disobedience  among the rank and file is spreading.  It is an irony that this tend  has become visible in the tough verdict against Liu Xiabo.  In front  of the court in which China's leadership organized the show trial, we could not only see international reporters and diplomats, but Chinese supporters of Liu shouted slogans and unrolled posters thus deliberately risking their arrest.  Only a few courageous people went to the court, but they showed that intimidation no longer works as successfully as in the past.  This new trend is not only confined to  the traditional political protest.  Courageous lawyers of the Weiquan civil rights movement are defending victims of the arbitrariness of  state agencies and they defend each other, too.  And the number of peaceful and violent civil protests is on the rise.  But the Chinese  Communist Party fails miserably when it comes to channeling communication with its critics into a constructive direction.  The verdict against Liu Xiabo is one more example.  It will only partially obtain the desired effect but not intimidate the people.  At the same time, new embitterment, new disobedience is growing.  With each show  trial, the party is now doing of what it is accusing Liu: it undermines the state's authority."   BERLIN 00001626  005 OF 005   5.   (U.S.)   Healthcare Reform  Under the headline: "Reform Blues," Sueddeutsche Zeitung (12/28) had  this to say: "There is no doubt that the healthcare reform bill that  has now been adopted in the Senate is a great work...and trailblazing. But enthusiasm about the success is limited.  One reason is that the  legislative process is so tiresome; but there is an even more important reason: disappointment and doubts are spreading.  The advocates of the reform have been brought down to earth again because they were able to implement only a few of their demands.   Thus far,  the Democrats have lost the fight for public opinion.  They will have to do quite a lot in the election campaign in 2010 to avoid being punished for a reasonable reform."  Die Welt (12/28) argued: "The Democrats will now have difficulty explaining to their irritated voters why it is historic progress that 31 million compatriots who have no coverage today will get health insurance, and that health insurance companies can no longer reject  sick Americans or demand astronomically high premiums.  This reform is supposed to carry itself and not burden the budget.  But the opponents to the bill do not believe a word, arguing that the nation will go bankrupt.  This is a highly imperfect, weakened bill and, at the same time, a giant step forward into an American future in which job loss  no longer means the end of insurance protection for a former employee and their whole family."  DELAWIE
UNCLAS BERLIN 001636  STATE PASS to EEB STATE PASS TO USTR  SENSITIVE  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ECON EFIN ETRD ELAB GMSUBJECT: Lame Duck German Governor Kicked Upstairs as New Energy Commissioner in Brussels  REF: Frankfurt 002808 Sensitive but unclassified; not for Internet Distribution. 1. (SBU) Chancellor Angela Merkel nominated Baden- Wuerttemberg (BW) Minister President Guenther Oettinger as EU Energy Commissioner primarily to remove an unloved lame duck from an important CDU bastion.  The move was not the promotion of a valued colleague as Merkel's allies sought to portray it. Rather, Oettinger's increasing loss of party support in BW compelled Merkel to push Oettinger out to protect her support base there.  Oettinger is noted for a lackluster public speaking style, and some commentators have asserted that Merkel, who has often stood out at EU meetings, wanted to appoint a German Commissioner who would not outshine her.  2. (SBU) Germany has a time-honored tradition of sending unwanted politicians to the EU Commission, although departing SPD EU Industry Commissioner Guenter Verheugen proved his worth during his tenure.  Oettinger has criticized Merkel for her policy stances (on federal support to Opel and on generous subsidies to the former eastern states, for instance)  and her purported lack of leadership while antagonizing other influential CDU leaders.  In addition to being a poor public speaker, he has a tendency to put his foot in his mouth.  The best-known example was his ill-advised 2007 defense of a CDU predecessor as an opponent of the National Socialist regime, despite his documented pro-Nazi war record.  Nonetheless, Oettinger is said by industry sources in Baden-Wuerttemberg to be an efficient behind-the-scenes negotiator. 3. (U) Merkel was criticized for choosing the energy portfolio, which many derided as too insignificant for Germany.  Werner Langen, CDU/CSU caucus spokesman in the EU Parliament, said the portfolio has "lost significance." Prominent Green Member of the European Parliament, Reinhard Buetikofer characterized it as "not particularly influential," and Der Spiegel called it a "makeshift job."  The EU Energy Commissioner is responsible for issues such as supply security, energy R and efficiency, competition in the gas and electricity markets, infrastructure and low carbon technologies.  However, key issues such as energy security and climate change are not in the portfolio; nor will Oettinger take over the role of EU Commission Vice President from Verheugen. 4. (U) Oettinger has an academic background in law and economics and professional experience as a tax consultant and accountant.  His political expertise is in media policy.  His background in energy appears limited to public support for nuclear power and the extension of power plant operating licenses.  His pro-nuclear stance is in stark contrast to many other German politicians, who support the phase out of nuclear power.  This endears him to the EU, which is focused on diversification of energy sources and does not exclude nuclear energy.  Nuclear power plants supply most of BW's energy while renewable energy and fossil fuels do not play a significant role.  Oettinger has not expressed interest to date in energy issues other than nuclear.  His priorities in his list submitted to the EU Parliament in the run up to the January hearings of the candidate Commission are reportedly vague.  5.  (SBU) Parliamentarians, skeptical of several members of the new Commission, are likely to display particular interest in Oettinger's views on binding energy efficiency targets and encouraging more competition in internal energy markets. Although Germany has embraced a controversial domestic goal of increasing energy efficiency by 20% by 2020, it has yet to translate the EU energy efficiency directive into national law.  Germany has also steadfastly opposed liberalization of its power sector oligopoly (what Brussels calls "unbundling") although individual German companies are slowly moving in that direction.  Oettinger's stance on the internal energy market will also be of particular interest to European parliamentarians, who see France, and particularly French power giant EdF, as a major barrier to opening up the market. EdF is a major share-holder in BW regional energy supplier ENBW, which operates the state's nuclear power plants -- and with which Oettinger is known to have warm relations.   DELAWIE
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BERLIN 000168  STATE FOR EUR/AGS(SCHROEDER), EEB/IFD/OMA, AND DRL/ILCSR LABOR FOR ILAB(BRUMFIELD) TREASURY FOR ICN(KOHLER) AND OASIA SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/09/2019 TAGS: EFIN PREL PGOV GMSUBJECT: GERMAN ECONOMICS MINISTER THROWS IN TOWEL  BERLIN 00000168  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: CHARGE D'AFFAIRES JOHN KOENIG. REASONS: 1.4 (B) AND (D).   1. (C) SUMMARY.  The sudden resignation of Economics Minister Michael Glos (CSU) on February 7 caught Chancellor Angela Merkel (CDU) and her party off guard at a time when addressing Germany's economic downturn is paramount.  To minimize damage, the CSU quickly replaced Glos with its Secretary General Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg, a decision which continues to draw criticism from other parties as well as from within the CDU due to thirty-seven-year-old,s minimal background in economic policy.  The shuffle reveals strains between the CDU and CSU, and presents an opportunity for Merkel's political foes to portray her as lacking control as the country tries to deal with its worst economic crisis since World War II.  END SUMMARY.  INITIAL CONFUSION OVER RESIGNATION ----------------------------------  2. (C) Citing his age and intention to leave the cabinet after the September 2009 elections, the sixty-four-year-old Glos submitted his resignation as Minister for Economics and Technology on February 7.  Chairman of the Christian Social Union (CSU), the Bavarian sister party of Chancellor Merkel's Christian Democratic Union (CDU), and Bavarian Minister President Horst Seehofer named Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg, 37, as his successor.  Zu Guttenberg had been CSU Secretary General for only three months following a major party reshuffle.  Glos explained his departure would allow the CSU to campaign with a new minister in place, and help restore trust in the CSU following its poor showing in the Bavarian regional elections in September 2008.  The timing of his departure -- during the financial and economic crises -- however, was awkward.  In addition, Glos submitted his resignation to Seehofer instead of Merkel, which the media has portrayed as a snub to the Chancellor.  (NOTE: Bavarian political reactions to be reported in ConGen Munich SEPTEL.)  ENTER THE YOUNG TURK --------------------  3. (SBU) Under pressure to resolve an apparent power vacuum at a key ministry, Seehofer, who as CSU Party Chairman had the right to fill the slot, had to find a replacement for Glos quickly.  At a February 9 press conference announcing the choice of zu Guttenberg, Seehofer said that he chose the rising CSU star partly in order to have a minister representing the northern region of Bavaria.  He lauded zu Guttenberg's international contacts and his presumed ability to promote German exports.  Seehofer denied reports that before accepting the new post, zu Guttenberg had demanded the high-level position of CSU Bundestag Spokesman and CDU/CSU Caucus Chief in case the CDU/CSU lost the September elections.  For his part, zu Guttenberg welcomed the opportunity to take on the economics portfolio.  He described Germany's "social market economy" as the "guiding principle" of his economic thinking, and underscored the importance of free trade.  Zu Guttenberg also said he would work to lower taxes for small- and medium-sized companies.   GLOS'S ROUGH RIDE -----------------  4. (C) Glos had always been an awkward fit for the Economics Ministry job, which he took on in November 2005.  Glos did bring intimate knowledge of federal politics to the job, but was not an economist and had never shown strong interest in the Economics Ministry's portfolio.  Chancellor Merkel instinctively turned to her Finance Minister Peer Steinbrueck (SPD) to coordinate the response to the financial crisis, sidelining Glos.  Glos's inability to overcome CDU and SPD objectives and get additional tax cuts into the stimulus plan may have cost the CSU the recent Bavarian elections, to the dismay of Seehofer and others in the CSU.  5. (C) A devastating profile of Glos a few months ago in "Der Spiegel," whose main points Ministry contacts did not contadict, portrayed him as weak, out of touch with the bureaucracy, bored with his job, and looking forward to a nice sinecure for himself after retirement.  In a farewell  BERLIN 00000168  002.2 OF 002   meeting with former Ambassador Timken in late November 2008, Glos appeared under great strain and confessed to tremendous frustration over his inability to influence Merkel on tax cuts as part of the stimulus package.  NO LOVE LOST ------------  6. (C) SPD party stalwarts are giddy over perceived turmoil in the CSU and the perception that Merkel is not in control of developments.  Chancellor-candidate Frank-Walter Steinmeier (SPD) said the CDU/CSU lacked "orientation" in their management of the economic crisis and called for "party order and discipline."  A CDU staffer expressed irritation over Seehofer's handling of the shuffle, but she shed no tears over Glos's departure.  On zu Guttenberg, FDP economics expert Rainer Bruederle commented to us that "as far as economics is concerned, it seems to be enough these days for the CSU to find someone who can read and write."  7. (C) The business community has mixed views.  An IBM lobbyist told Econoff that she regarded Glos as the only "counterweight to Steinbrueck" on economic policymaking in the Germany government.  A contact from the German industry association (BDI) conceded that Glos was "not the strongest Minister in the Cabinet," adding that BDI had often wished for someone in the position who was "more outspoken."  On zu Guttenberg, he conceded the new Minister was well-versed in foreign policy and transatlantic issues, though young and inexperienced.  COMMENT -------  8. (C) Glos's resignation caught the CDU/CSU party hierarchy off-guard at a time when everyone in Berlin and Munich was concentrating on the Munich Security Conference.  This high-profile resignation opens the door to criticism of Merkel,s handling of the economic and financial crises, as well as Seehofer's leadership style.  Zu Guttenberg's first challenge will be to help resolve the debate between the CDU/CSU and SPD over the stimulus package.  His appointment has been heavily criticized within the CDU, with some calling him a mere "place holder" until the September elections, raising questions about Merkel,s ability to steer her party effectively through a long  election year. If not addressed, the SPD and the opposition FDP could emerge strengthened by the affair, which has come at a very inopportune time for Chancellor Merkel,s CDU and its sister party, the CSU. END COMMENT.  9. (U) This cable was coordinated with ConGens Frankfurt and Munich. Koenig
S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 BERLIN 000345  NOFORN SIPDIS FOR THE PRESIDENT FROM CHARGE D'AFFAIRES JOHN M. KOENIG  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/23/2034 TAGS: GM MARR NATO PGOV PHUM PRELSUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR THE PRESIDENT'S BILATERAL MEETING WITH CHANCELLOR MERKEL ON THE MARGINS OF THE NATO SUMMIT  BERLIN 00000345  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Charge d'Affaires John M. Koenig for reasons 1.4 (b) and  (d)   1.  (S/NF) Chancellor Merkel will be focused on a productive, substantive meeting when you visit Baden-Baden April 3. Germany holds the greatest untapped potential in Europe for our transatlantic agenda; unlocking it will take sustained effort by the Administration, and the payoff will not be immediate.  What is most on Merkel,s mind is her political future, six months before national elections, with her poll numbers wobbling and her coalition increasingly dysfunctional.  Germany,s capacity to act is constrained by (1) the short-term demands of domestic politics (about which we can do little), (2) the slow pace of change in public support for a German leadership role (a focus of our engagement), and (3) the constant demands of the economic crisis.  Your meeting provides an opportunity to map out key priorities with Germany for the remainder of Merkel,s current term and beyond.  --------------------------------- Merkel,s Own Crisis -- Leadership ---------------------------------  2.  (S/NF) Merkel is methodical, rational, and pragmatic -- qualities that propelled her to stratospheric levels of public support early in her tenure, when she presided over a recovering economy and a successful presidency of the European Union.  The past year has been less kind, and the almost exactly equal split in the German electorate between left and right is re-emerging as elections approach.  Merkel now faces a  knot8 of rising unemployment, economic crisis, and domestic political dissatisfaction at a time when she can least afford a wrong move.  The effectiveness of Merkel,s  Coalition8 government is declining as her Christian Democrats (CDU) and their Social Democratic (SPD) partners begin in earnest their campaigns for the September 2009 election.  The Chancellor,s edge over the rival SPD, led by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, is diminishing.  When cornered, Merkel can be tenacious but is risk averse and rarely creative.  This suggests she will remain a very circumspect Ally until the election.  3.  (C/NF) The collapse of German exports and industrial activity has shocked Chancellor Merkel and her advisors. They had thought Germany would escape the worst of the world recession thanks to its competitive position in emerging markets.  In the New Year, Merkel and Finance Minister Peer Steinbrueck (SPD) rushed a relatively robust stimulus program through the Bundestag that is timed to counter a surge in unemployment just before the September elections.  Like most Germans, they doubt further deficit spending will generate lasting growth, and fear too large a stimulus may cause stagflation at home and dangerous new global imbalances. Merkel and Steinbrueck remain bitter at the brush-off they allegedly received during the last administration when they advocated tighter financial oversight.  Tougher regulations, they insist, are essential to restore confidence in the banking system and get credit flowing again, thus creating the pre-conditions for a sustainable recovery.  4.  (C/NF) Hoping to escape responsibility for the economic crisis, Merkel has issued public critiques of U.S. recovery policy that exaggerate the differences between Washington and continental Europe.  In fact, Germany faces many of the same difficult choices as the U.S.  The Chancellor is expected to put forward a further stimulus package later this year.  Her government has bailed out big banks while holding firm on state aid to ailing firms like Opel.  The conventional wisdom in Germany is that Opel could be rescued with minimum state aid if only it could be separated from GM, but in fact there is no viable business plan for the firm to stand on its own. The Chancellor is surrounded by bad options:  an interventionist approach would further alienate economic conservatives in her CDU (who are already defecting in droves to the free-market FDP); if she does nothing, Steinmeier and the SPD will harvest the goodwill of centrist voters for trying to save Opel.  Merkel has not been above shifting responsibility to the USG and General Motors, which she and  BERLIN 00000345  002.2 OF 002   the German media unfairly blame for bleeding Opel dry.  In the end, Merkel,s government will likely be forced to prop up at least parts of the automaker.  -------------------------------------------- Increasing Political Caution during Campaign --------------------------------------------  5.  (S/NF) Merkel and Steinmeier are pragmatists; on foreign policy, in particular, there is more that unites them than divides them.  But the centrifugal forces of the election campaign and the growing mistrust between the CDU and SPD make it increasingly difficult for them to agree on any big ideas about Germany,s role in the world or its relations with the United States.  Buffeted by events, Merkel is struggling to define a convincing vision for  Germany;  is the sole component at this point.  She is blessed that Steinmeier, her principal competitor, faces even greater difficulties.  His party has lost its bearings in the Grand Coalition and is plagued by internal divisions. Steinmeier himself is a technocrat and a latecomer to electoral politics -- his shortcomings on stage are significant.  Steinmeier has tried to make up ground on Merkel by publicly identifying himself with the new U.S. Administration.  However, his ability to deliver on policy initiatives without the Chancellor,s political support is limited.  6.  (C/NF) Afghanistan is an example.  Merkel has been cautious throughout her chancellorship and has doggedly resisted real or perceived pressure for Germany to take on a larger military role.  She and Steinmeier both have supported the Comprehensive Approach, but the Chancellor,s CDU, in the face of public skepticism, is reluctant even to consider increasing police or civilian support.  Steinmeier and the SPD have been more forward-leaning, but they cannot deliver on their own.  You should emphasize that at the moment the U.S. is not seeking significant additional military forces from Germany, but that every member of the international community will need to do much more (e.g., training security forces and providing civilian assistance) if we are to be successful.  --------------------------------------- Policy Opportunities on Russia and Iran ---------------------------------------  7.  (C/NF) Germany should play a central role with the U.S. in defining a coordinated western Russia policy that resets the relationship without retreating from our values.  The winter gas crisis made Germans rethink Russia,s reliability as a supplier, but the lack of alternatives and the desirability of gas as a clean energy source have left the government resigned to dependency on Russia in the near-to-medium term.  On energy as well as Georgia, neither Merkel nor Steinmeier has identified areas where German policy steps could help create a more persuasive set of incentives for Russia to integrate further into rules-based relationships and institutions.  Meanwhile, Germany is concerned about threats to economic and social stability in Central and Eastern Europe, but prefers EU and IMF approaches to limit its share of the bill.  8.  (C/NF) Both Merkel and Steinmeier welcomed your Nowruz address to the Iranian people and government.  They support the U.S. investment in the diplomatic track and agree that Germany and the EU need to invest in the economic pressure track.  Germany,s close ties to Israel include an imperative to defend Israel,s right to exist and to play an active role in international non-proliferation efforts toward Iran. Merkel will be looking to the meeting to gain a better understanding of how you see the USG Iran policy unfolding and what role we need Germany to play.  9.  (U) Mr. President, Mission Germany is honored to support you on your first overseas trip as President, and we look forward to welcoming you in Baden-Baden. Koenig
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BERLIN 000128SIPDISSTATE FOR EUR, S/CT, LE.O. 12958: DECL: 01/29/2020TAGS: PTER KTFN KCRM KHLS ECPS ECON PREL KPAO KTIAGMSUBJECT: ACTION REQUEST: OVERCOMING GERMAN DOUBTS ON U.S.DATA PRIVACY PRACTICESREF: A. STATE 8403B. 2009 BERLIN 1528C. 2009 BERLIN 1377D. 2009 BERLIN 1167 Classified By: Robert A. Pollard, Minister-Counselor for Economic Affairs, for Reasons 1.4 (b,d).1. (U) This is an action request.2. (C) Embassy Berlin strongly recommends that the WashingtonTerrorist Finance Tracking Program (TFTP) and data privacyexperts currently scheduled to visit Brussels next week alsovisit Berlin to discuss TFTP and U.S. data privacy policywith German officials. Germany is critical to the debate ondata protection issues within the EU and we need to engageGerman government interlocutors, parliamentarians and opinionmakers. The exaggerated data privacy views of the currentminority governing partner, the Free Democratic Party (FDP),have contributed to a domestic discussion that distorts U.S.policy and is negatively-influencing the European debate.Embassy believes we will be most successful if we addressGerman data privacy concerns in a comprehensive way,including various information sharing programs such asHSPD-6, TFTP, and Passenger Name Records.3. (C) Germany has become a difficult partner with regards tosecurity-related information sharing initiatives followingthe September 27 national elections, which brought the FDPinto the governing coalition. The FDP sees themselves asdefenders of citizens' privacy rights and these views haveled the FDP to oppose many of Germany's post-9/11counterterrorism legislative proposals (see reftels). Attimes, the FDP's fixation on data privacy and protectionissues looks to have come at the expense of the party formingresponsible views on counterterrorism policy.4. (C) Over the past months, Ambassador Murphy, the DCM, andother embassy staff have engaged German governmentinterlocutors, influential parliamentarians and lawenforcement officials to stress the importance ofsecurity-related information sharing initiatives such asTFTP. However, in these meetings, our German counterpartsconsistently raise concerns about U.S. data protectionmeasures and policy. Furthermore, the German views oftendistort and misrepresent U.S. policy. For example, currentFederal Justice Minister Sabine Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger(FDP) - who has considerable influence - is particularlyoutspoken and does not appear to have (or perhaps want) aninformed view of USG data privacy practices. It is criticalthat we aggressively and vocally counter thesemisrepresentations of U.S. policy.5. (C) Embassy staff raised the prospect of an inter-agencyexperts group visiting Berlin with xxxxx.xxxxx who is a strong supporter of close U.S.-Germancounterterrorism cooperation and information sharing,welcomed the proposal and believed that skeptics of U.S.policy in other ministries and Bundestag parliamentarianswould benefit from a comprehensive and factual discussion ofthe details of U.S. data protection policy.6. (C) In addition to our request that the Treasury visitorsto Brussels add a Berlin-stop, we strongly recommend that aninter-agency data privacy experts delegation visit Berlin todiscuss overall U.S. data privacy policy with Germanofficials. The FDP returned to power after a ten-year forayin the opposition and key leaders lack experience in thepractical matters of tackling real-world security issues inthe Internet age. In our meetings we have made the pointthat countering terrorism in a globalized world, whereterrorists and their supporters use open borders andinformation technology to quickly move people and financing,requires robust international data sharing. We need to alsoBERLIN 00000128 002 of 002demonstrate that the U.S. has strong data privacy measures inplace so that robust data sharing comes with robust dataprotections.Murphy
C O N F I D E N T I A L BERLIN 000153SIPDISE.O. 12958: DECL: 02/03/2020TAGS: PGOV PREL EFIN ECON GMSUBJECT: DEFLATED EXPECTATIONS FOR MERKEL'S DREAM COALITIONAFTER FIRST 100 DAYSREF: 2009 BERLIN 1528 Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Greg Delawie for reasons 1.4 (b, d).1. (C) Summary: One hundred days after Germany's black-yellow coalition took office, a strong, unified government led by Chancellor Merkel has yet to materialize. The much anticipated dream coalition comprised of Merkel's Christian Democratic Union (CDU), its Bavarian sister the Christian Social Union (CSU), and Free Democratic Party (FDP) which promised a unified conservative approach to the economy and like minded thinking on social welfare, the environment, and foreign policy has become bogged down in party politics with no end in sight. Recent polls show that the bickering may be at least partly to blame for the FDP's 5.6 percent fall in the polls, with it now down to 9 percent from its historic 14.6 percent election results (see septel) and the CSU plummet to an historic low of 41 percent. Indeed one minister is now threatening resignation. Sources from the three coalition parties have admitted to problems, blaming the other coalition parties, and downplaying their significance. Merkel has come under criticism within her own party for not taking strong public stands and reining in her coalition partners, instead staying above the political fray. The opposition, particularly the Social Democratic Party (SPD), is trying to capitalize on this divided we rule coalition with an eye toward unseating a teetering CDU-FDP coalition in North-Rhine Westphalia (NRW) in May elections, thereby tipping the CDU-FDP Bundesrat majority in its favor. Merkel is counting on better economic and political indicators after the NRW election followed by the release of the annual tax forecasts to congeal the coalition. If the CDU/FDP coalition fails in NRW, coalition divisions are likely to become more pronounced. End Summary.Off to a Rocky Start---------------------2. (C) Concluding a coalition agreement in only three weeks, prior to her November 2 departure for Washington to address Congress and in time for the 9 November 20 year anniversary of German unity may have been Chancellor Merkel's first and only major success to date in marshaling coalition unity. But the feat may have had consequences. The haste to sign has left half-resolved differences on tax cuts, economic policy, Afghanistan, Turkey, health care, data protection (see reftel) and other issues that continue to gurgle to the surface. Important to recognize is that each party is operating under its own political pressures from different voting constituencies. The FDP's main goal is to deliver on campaign promises  particularly tax relief  and shore up its base, the CSU is desperate to regain its dominance in Bavaria, and the CDU is seeking to rebuild its eroded voter base. All three parties and the opposition are now gearing up for May 9 elections in NRW. This election in Germany's most populous state, referred to as a small national election, is regarded as a partial vote of confidence on the national coalition, and will determine the Bundesrat majority. If the NRW CDU-FDP coalition fails to return to government, the national CDU-FDP coalition will fall by six seats in the Bundesrat  from 37 to 31 seats  it will lose its majority. Such a loss could well hamper the government's ability to pass major financial or economic legislation.3. (C) Each of the three coalition parties have pointed to the others for instigating tension. CDU party contact xxxxx accused the FDP of functioning as if it were still in the opposition. Senior SPD parliamentarian Hans-Ulrich Klose attributed the coalition strains to the FDP adjusting to being in government after 11 years in the opposition. FDP contact xxxxx accused the CDU/CSU of reacting to their own internal problems: for the CDU, its controversy over the Kunduz airstrike, and for the CSU, its involvement in a major bank scandal. The FDP also points to the CSU's strong rivalry with the FDP, with which it now governs in Bavaria. The CSU is still trying to recover from its historic low voting results in the September 2008 state elections, which forced it for the first time in 46 years to govern within a coalition. All parties, however, have downplayed the significance of the feuds, with senior CDU party operative xxxxx explaining in January that the party leaderships are just now settling in after an exhausting election campaign and intense coalition negotiations. He hoped (more than predicted) that the parties would soon settle into a more cooperative relationship. In January, Merkel called a small summit for coalition leadership with Westerwelle and Seehofer to smooth things over and commit to a new beginning. While the coalition's political edginess receded for a time, policy divisions continue to surface.CDU/CSU vs FDP  the Economy-----------------------------4. (C) While CDU/CSU and FDP voters may be the most likely to cross over to the other party, their mainstay voter bases are different, with the CDU/CSU appealing to economically conservative voters who also support the social market economy, but are socially conservative. The FDP base is composed of free-market advocates, who are socially liberal and strong advocates of civil liberties. The FDP's campaign and continuing mantra has been for much larger tax cuts in 2011, worth 20-24 billion euros, apparently at the expense of both coalition unity and the better judgment of economic experts. The cuts would make getting the deficit back under the EU ceiling of 3 percent of GDP by 2013 nearly impossible. National debt will rise from 66 percent of GDP to 80 percent. There are growing public concerns over rising debt, but also about perceived disarray in the coalition's tax and budget policies. Merkel insists that a decision regarding the tax reduction plans will not be taken before May, when the overall tax revenue forecast is due. Waiting until May also means the coalition will not have to go public with unpopular consolidation measures until after the NRW elections. Finance Minister Schaeuble (CDU) appears unenthusiastic at best about further tax cuts. He has already said deficit reduction measures would have to start in 2011. The CSU has also called the FDP's call for speedy tax relief measures unrealistic despite the fact that it had included such a demand during its election campaign. The most recent squabble between the FDP and CSU is over FDP Health Minister Roesler's plans for health care reform which foresees more care options and the introduction of competition. Seehofer has rejected the proposal, holding fast against radical changes to the system. Roesler has indicated he might resign over this issue.Foreign Policy--------------5. (C) Coalition feuding over economic and tax policy has trumped coalition divisions over foreign policy, although FM Westerwelle has managed a few disruptions in the latter. As a harbinger of hard times to come, as one of his first actions, Westerwelle opposed the naming of CDU Bundestag member Erika Steinbach to the foundation Flight Expulsion and Reconciliation citing possible damage to relations with Poland. As President of Germany's Federation of Expellees, Steinbach is disliked in Poland. While the numbers are disputed, the expellee community, which mainly votes CSU or CDU, has exerted influence on the issue. National and State CDU and CSU politicians came out in support of Steinbach with only Merkel keeping mum. The controversy continues, despite ongoing attempts to reach a compromise, threatening to drain coalition attention and good-will.6. (C) Coalition strains have also surfaced on the issue of overseas deployments. Regarding a troop increase in Afghanistan, Westerwelle's position was at first muddled, as he tried to reflect his party's general negativity toward overseas military deployments while at the same time tending to his role as Germany's chief diplomat in the run-up to the London Conference. In the end, he (together with the opposition) likely played a role in achieving a lower-than-expected troop increase. Westerwelle also convinced the CDU to agree on gradually reducing German participation in UNIFIL. The CSU also rocked the coalition boat on Afghanistan, with Seehofer expressing general skepticism on a troop increase, although he later came around. In addition, CSU Secretary General Dobrindt has ridiculed the federal government's reconciliation concept in Afghanistan as a cash for clunkers version for the Taliban.Comment---------7. (C) Chancellor Merkel may have ironically cast off the yoke of the Grand Coalition only now to be encumbered with a new FDP-CSU double yoke, restrained by an FDP bent on delivering on campaign promises and a CSU distracted over its rivalry with the FDP and internal problems. High expectations for the dream coalition are certainly in part to blame for the current polls, with popularity numbers for Merkel and Westerwelle both having suffered. Worried most, however, are the CDU and FDP politicians in NRW, who fear that the national coalition's squabbling could negatively impact their own chances in the May 9 elections. The leadership threesome  Merkel, Westerwelle, and Seehofer  may make an extra effort to get along, or at least appear to get along, as the NRW elections near. It is not clear that Westerwelle and the FDP, however, believe that it is the squabbling that is unhelpful, or rather its own inability todeliver as yet on certain campaign promises. If it is the latter, more coalition tensions could ensue as Westerwelle begins to expend more energy as FDP Chairman and less as Foreign Minister, gearing up his party for its NRW campaign. Berlin is once again becoming bogged down in political squabbles as the NRW elections near.8. (U) Consulate Munich contributed to this cable.Murphy
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BERLIN 000157  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/03/2020 TAGS: PREL MARR MOPS NATO GM AFSUBJECT: DEFENSE MINISTER ZU GUTTENBERG REVEALS STRUGGLE WITH FM WESTERWELLE ON TROOP INCREASE FOR AFGHANISTAN  REF: A. BERLIN 138      B. BERLIN 112  Classified By: AMBASSADOR PHILIP D. MURPHY. REASONS: 1.4 (B) AND (D).  1.  (C) SUMMARY.  Defense Minister zu Guttenberg revealed in a February 3 meeting with Ambassador Murphy that coalition partner FM Westerwelle -- not the opposition Social Democratic Party (SPD) -- had been the single biggest obstacle to the government seeking a bigger increase in German troops for Afghanistan.  But even with the modest planned troop increase of 500 (with 350 more in reserve), zu Guttenberg said a restructuring of the current Bundeswehr presence would allow Germany to increase the number of soldiers involved in the training of Afghan National Army (ANA) by more than 1,000.  While Westerwelle has portrayed his skepticism about additional troops as principled, it was also motivated by a desire to put zu Guttenberg "in his place."  While the size of the troop increase is settled, the length of the new ISAF mandate remains open.  The government is hoping to have the new mandate approved by the Bundestag before the end of February, with significant (if not majority) support from the opposition SPD and Greens.  END SUMMARY.  WESTERWELLE: BIGGEST OBSTACLE  2. (C) In explaining the lower-than-expected planned increase in the number of German troops for Afghanistan, zu Guttenberg told the Ambassador that Westerwelle's opening position in the coalition negotiations on the new mandate had been "not one additional soldier."  In that context, it had been difficult to get agreement on any increase at all.  (Comment: Zu Guttenberg proposed 1,500 additional troops at the initial January 4 mini-cabinet meeting on this issue.  End Comment.)  DOING A LOT MORE WITH A LITTLE MORE  3. (C) To help justify the need for more troops, zu Guttenberg said he had forced the Bundeswehr to do a complete review of all the existing positions in Afghanistan, which had confirmed that some could be eliminated in light of the new ISAF counterinsurgency strategy.  He said a restructuring of the current Bundeswehr presence, combined with the troop increase, would boost the number of soldiers involved in the training of the Afghan National Army (ANA) from 280 to 1,400.  The restructuring includes turning the battalion-size quick reaction force based in Mazar into a "protection and training" battalion.  A second such battalion will be created in Kunduz by augmenting the existing infantry company there with new troops.  Zu Guttenberg reiterated that Germany strongly supports COMISAF's focus on protection of the population and partnering with the Afghan national security forces (ANSF), and that the German "trainers" (i.e., the two new maneuver battalions) will operate in the field with the ANSF.  PUTTING ZU GUTTENBERG IN HIS PLACE  4. (C) While zu Guttenberg said he is avoiding public comment on whether the outcome of the coalition talks on the new mandate is a "victory" for him or Westerwelle, FDP Defense Policy Spokesman Elke Hoff told poloff separately that Westerwelle's hard line against additional troops had been motivated in part to "teach zu Guttenberg a lesson." She claimed that zu Guttenberg had been too presumptuous last fall in making speeches in Canada and the U.S. about how Germany would significantly increase its troop contribution to ISAF.  He might have been able to get agreement on a higher ceiling had he engaged parliamentarians first and showed "greater respect for the political process."  OPEN QUESTION: LENGTH OF THE MANDATE  5. (C) Zu Guttenberg confirmed that the cabinet would formally agree on the proposed new ISAF mandate February 9 and that the first reading in the Bundestag would be February 10.  FM Westerwelle is scheduled to speak on behalf of the government in introducing the proposed mandate.  The government is aiming to hold the final Bundestag vote on the mandate -- following two weeks of committee hearings -- on February 26.  Zu Guttenberg was  BERLIN 00000157  002 OF 002   confident that a large number (if not a majority) of opposition politicians from the SPD and Greens would vote in favor of the new mandate.  6. (C) A February 2 meeting of state secretaries tentatively agreed that the new mandate should run, as is the custom, for one year, expiring in February 2011.  Zu Guttenberg indicated, however, that it might be preferable to stick to the length of the current mandate, which expires in December 2010.  He expressed concern that having the mandate lap over into early 2011 could lead to a premature debate on withdrawal, before the new strategy really had a chance to work.  (Comment: Another option under consideration -- and favored by some in the Chancellery -- is a 18-month mandate, so that any debate on the future of the troop presence would be put off until the fall of 2011.  But the MFA objects that this would only raise the ire of the opposition and give them an excuse to oppose the mandate.  End Comment.)  REASSURING THE GERMANS ON COMMAND OF THE NORTH  7. (C) Zu Guttenberg confirmed that Germany very much welcomed the planned inflow of U.S. forces into the north, especially the helicopter assets, which filled a long-standing shortfall.  He noted, however, that many in Germany question whether the U.S. will be willing to accept continued German leadership of RC-North in view of the increased U.S. presence.  Ambassador Murphy assured him that the U.S. had no issues working for the German command in the North. Murphy
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BERLIN 000164  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/05/2020 TAGS: OTRA MARR NATO PARM PINS PREL PGOV GM AF IRSUBJECT: WESTERWELLE ON AFGHANISTAN, IRAN, TAC NUKES  Classified By: Classified by Political M-C George Glass for reasons 1.4  (b,d).  1.  (C) German FM Westerwelle told Amb February 5 that it was important to refocus Afghanistan efforts on civilian reconstruction; that we needed to avoid suggesting German troops engaged in less risk than other countries; that he did not invite Iranian FM Mottaki to Germany or seek a meeting with him; that any discussion of non-strategic nuclear weapons needed to be conducted at 28 at NATO; and that he could not influence any decision by the European Parliament on the SWIFT agreement.  END SUMMARY. 2.  (C) The Ambassador asked about Westerwelle's first 100 days in office.  Though in an ebullient mood, Westerwelle said things were very difficult (FDP slipped another percentage point in the polls hours before the meeting).  He said he had been in France February 4 for a joint cabinet meeting, but that nothing substantive came of it.  He observed that one never really knew what was going to happen with Sarkozy involved.  -------------- AFGHANISTAN -------------  3.  (C) The Ambassador reviewed his own recent trip to Afghanistan.  He shared his impression that the Germans were doing a superb job at all levels from the RC-North commander on down.  He learned how critical mentoring and partnering with Afghan security forces had become.  He noted that the U.S. was sending substantial forces to RC-North, where they would conduct training and be under German command. Westerwelle responded that this was important for Germany and for international cooperation.  The Ambassador added that the U.S. was sending substantial helicopter support as well.  He said that Germans could be proud of their troops in Afghanistan.  Westerwelle responded that this was good news. He said that the London Conference bore an excellent conclusion, and was particularly useful for its focus on civilian progress.  He emphasized the importance of underscoring civilian reconstruction. 4.  (C) With a request for confidentiality, Westerwelle referred to the January 20 "Bild Zeitung" interview with General McChrystal, in which the general is quoted as urging the Germans to take more risks.  Westerwelle recounted that he himself had had to answer questions about this article for ten days, explaining that the Germans were not "peace soldiers" while  other countries provided the combat troops. He said it was important that German troops not be "relativized" and cast as second-class troops.  He observed that Germany had originally deployed 3,500 troops, increased that mandate to 4,500, and was now planning an increase of another 500 plus a reserve.  He emphasized that this was a major contribution compared with other European countries. 5.  (C) The Ambassador noted that he had gained the impression in Afghanistan that police training was more challenging than he had originally understood.  Troops were usually required to provide force protection.  But German police training was the best. 6.  (C) The Ambassador asked how the prospective February 26 Bundestag debate to extend the Bundeswehr mandate in Afghanistan would play out.  Westerwelle said the question was how large a majority would approve the new mandate.  He said that SPD caucus chief Steinmeier displayed good will on this issue.  However, SPD chairman Gabriel wanted to politicize the issue for domestic political gain. Nevertheless, he thought some in the SPD would support the new mandate.  However, Westerwelle expected no support from the Greens.  Westerwelle noted that the May NRW state elections were also affecting the issue in a negative way. That said, he said he could not see Steinmeier opposing the larger mandate.  He hoped the Ambassador would speak with Steinmeier.  ------ IRAN ------  7.  (C) Asked about the February 5 visit of Iranian FM Mottaki to the Munich Security Conference, Westerwelle emphasized that he (Westerwelle) had not invited Mottaki to come to Germany, and Westerwelle had also not requested a meeting with Mottaki.  Rather, it was Mottaki who was asking to see Westerwelle.  Westerwelle said he had still not decided whether he would talk to Mottaki or not.  He reflected concern that Tehran might try to exploit Mottaki's visit to Germany as a distraction, and continue executing people during the visit.  In any case, Westerwelle said his position was exactly the same as the U.S. on Iran, and he would share the results of any meeting with Mottaki, if it took place.  BERLIN 00000164  002 OF 002   8.  (C) Westerwelle said he would meet Russian FM Lavrov and (separately) Chinese FM Yang February 5.  He suggested that Moscow had been changing course on Iran sanctions since the Qom revelations.  The Russians now saw Iran as playing games on the nuclear issue.  However, he observed that China was "hesitant," or even in opposition to sanctions.  Reflecting on his recent visit to China, Westerwelle said he had not perceived any "good will" there at present.  He said he would ask Yang again about Iran and then share the results with the U.S.  Westerwelle opined that it was important also to focus on Brazil as an opinion leader in the Third World.  He noted that President Lula had received Ahmadinejad warmly several months ago.  He added that he was uncertain what the Saudis thought, but that the other Persian Gulf countries seemed to be in an existential panic about the Iranian nuclear program.  ----------- TAC NUKES -----------  9.  (C) Touching briefly on arms control, Westerwelle stated unequivocally that tactical nuclear weapons was an issue for NATO.  He said that when he had received Kissinger, Schulz, Perry and Nunn on February 3 to talk about their global zero proposal, tactical nuclear weapons was not discussed.  He said that the four statesmen were very supportive of President Obama.  ---------- TFTP ---------  10.  (C) The Ambassador raised the challenge of getting the European Parliament to approve an agreement to share data with the U.S. on tracking terrorist finance.  The Ambassador noted the extensive efforts of the Treasury Department and other U.S. agencies to explain the importance of the program to our common security.  He asked how one could get better support for the program.  Westerwelle replied that the German government had been able to come up with a solution for itself a few months ago when the issue first surfaced. (Comment: In fact, German Interior Minister de Maziere's vote to abstain in the EU Council vote on TFTP on November 30 reflected the complete deadlock within the Coalition Government between TFTP advocates in the CDU-controlled Interior Ministry and TFTP opponents in the FDP-controlled Justice Ministery. End Comment.) However, Westerwelle said that now that the issue was in the European Parliament, he had no ability to influence it.  He said that he was very, very aware of the Secretary's interest in this issue. Nevertheless, he had a sense that almost all groups in the European Parliament had concerns with the proposed agreement.  He emphasized that this was not an issue that only concerned his party, the FDP, but rather many others as well. 11. (C) Westerwelle shared that he had not yet appointed a new Coordinator for German-American cooperation.  ---------- COMMENT ---------  12.  (C) Westerwelle (who spoke with ease in English) was in a buoyant mood and more confident on his issues than we have seen him so far.  He seemed ready to defend any intimation that he was less than supportive of a troop surge (Defense Minister zu Guttenberg told the Ambassador two days ago that Westerwelle had worked for no increase of German troops for Afghanistan, see Berlin 157) with invocations of the importance of civilian reconstruction.  On Iran, he leapt at the chance to tell us he had not invited Mottaki.  His dodges on both tactical nuclear weapons and terrorist finance were all but practiced.  His comment that he was unable to affect the vote in the EU Parliament on TFTP was a bit disingenuous; on February 4, an MFA official acknowledged to visiting Treasury officials in Berlin that German MEPs were in fact leading the charge against TFTP in the EU Parliament with the tacit support of the FDP, if not of specialists in the Justice Ministry and MFA themselves. Westerwelle still cuts a good image in meetings and in the press here, even though his party continues a bout of free fall in the polls.  His ministry, though, still wonders (privately to us) where he gets his policy direction from.  END COMMENT. 13.  (U) The Ambassador did not have the chance to clear this cable before departing Berlin.    Murphy
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BERLIN 000180  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  DEPT FOR EUR, L, S/CT, EEB, INL TREASURY FOR TFI  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/11/2020 TAGS: PTER KTFN PGOV PREL PINR ETTC EAIR EFIN KCRMKJUS, KHLS, GM SUBJECT: CHANCELLOR MERKEL ANGERED BY LACK OF GERMAN MEP SUPPORT FOR TFTP  REF: A. BERLIN 176      B. BERLIN 128  Classified By: ROBERT A. POLLARD, Minister-Counselor for Economics Affa irs, for Reasons 1.4 (b and d).  1. (C) SUMMARY: Chancellor Merkel is privately angry over the lack of support German members of the European Parliament gave the Terrorist Finance Tracking Program (TFTP) interim agreement and is worried that Washington will view the EP's veto as a sign that Europe does not take the terrorist threat seriously.  Merkel is particularly irritated with German MEPs from her Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and sister Christian Social Union (CSU) parties, most of whom reportedly voted against the agreement despite previously indicating they would support it.  Public German reactions to the EP vote have come exclusively from TFTP detractors who portrayed the veto as a sign that the European Parliament has won a victory over an arrogant Commission/Council, as well as delivering a rebuke to U.S. counterterrorism policies that undervalue data privacy.  These events suggest the need to intensify our engagement with German government interlocutors, Bundestag and European parliamentarians, and opinion makers to demonstrate that the U.S. has strong data privacy measures in place.  END SUMMARY   2. (C) Hamburg Mayor Ole von Beust (CDU) told Ambassador today (2/12) that he had met with Chancellor Merkel last night and she was "very, very angry - angrier than he had ever seen her" with the outcome of the vote.  Beust said that the Chancellor had personally lobbied German MEPs from the CDU/CSU parties to support the agreement, but that most of these MEPs ended up voting against the agreement anyway. Merkel expressed concerns to Beust that Washington will view the EP veto as a sign that Europe does not take the terrorist threat seriously.  Merkel also worried about the ramifications (presumably within Europe and for transatlantic relations) that might follow were a terrorist attack to occur that could have been prevented had SWIFT data been exchanged.    3. (C) Federal Justice Minister Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger, a strong proponent of data privacy rights from the Free Democratic Party (FDP; see reftels), quickly welcomed the TFTP veto.  She said "the citizens of Europe have won a victory today that strengthened not just data protection, but democracy in all of Europe."  The Minister has been a vocal critic of the TFTP and in interviews today stressed that the EP veto will lead to a change of European policy in which "data protection is no longer just an appendix of security policy."  She also restated her understanding that German investigators believe TFTP data has not/not contributed meaningfully to terrorism investigations.  She said the EP decision paves the way for new negotiations that take into account European notions of data protection.   4. (C) Some German members of the European Parliament likewise applauded the TFTP veto.  Green Party MEP Jan Philipp Albrecht stated that the vote would not cause a "transatlantic ice-age" because President Obama has more important concerns and would not "emphasize this defeat too much at home."  Werner Langen, head of the EP CDU/CSU group, said that his group did not vote against the United States, but rather against the European Commission and the Council who had "negotiated a bad agreement."  Martin Schulz, head of the Social Democratic faction, said that the "negotiating position of the EU is now better."  FDP MEP Alexander Graf Lambsdorff acknowledged that the decision could be a temporary irritation in transatlantic relations, but believed that this would not last long and the time would soon come to "negotiate a reasonable agreement."  Bavarian State Minister Mueller told Munich CG that the CSU is interested in moving forward with the negotiation of a new agreement that meets US and European needs.   5. (C) COMMENT:  Why did so many German MEPs oppose TFTP?  BERLIN 00000180  002 OF 002   First, the debate was not just about TFTP.  Germans across the political spectrum adamantly support data protection ) whether it has to do with Passenger Name Records, Google,s supposed  on data searches, or individual credit ratings.  Recent scandals in which major firms such as Deutsche Telekom and Deutsche Bahn illegally tapped phones or files of tens of thousands of employees and customers reinforced Germans, concerns about the misuse of data technology.  Historical memory also plays a part, as stories about how the Stasi abused information to destroy people,s lives still regularly circulate in the press.  Paranoia runs deep especially about U.S. intelligence agencies.  We were astonished to learn how quickly rumors about alleged U.S. economic espionage ) at first associated with the new U.S. air passenger registration system (ESTA), then with TFTP ) gained currency among German parliamentarians in the run-up to the February 11 vote in Strasbourg.  Moreover, the fact that the libertarian Free Democratic Party (FDP) made data privacy a central plank of the pact with its coalition partners, the CDU/CSU ) and more importantly, captured the Justice Ministry ) made it very difficult for TFTP advocates like Interior Minister de Maiziere to speak up.  None of this may excuse the behavior of certain German MEPs, but it says something about the challenge ahead.   6. (C) COMMENT CONT.: The overwhelming rejection of the interim agreement by German MEPs from all political parties nonetheless is surprising.  Although we anticipated that the FDP and Greens would come out strongly against the interim agreement, the broad lack of support it received from the CDU/CSU and Social Democrats was unexpected.  We believe a number of factors contributed to this including the fact that MEPs of all stripes saw this as an early opportunity to exert their new post-Lisbon powers and send a message to the Commission and Council.  Specific to Germany, the almost complete absence of public statements by German leadership in support of the agreement resulted in a situation in which MEPs received no political coverage supporting a positive vote and saw little political cost for a no vote. Furthermore, the German public and political class largely tends to view terrorism abstractly given that it has been decades since any successful terrorist attack has occurred on German soil.  This week's TFTP vote demonstrates that we need to intensify our engagement with German government interlocutors, Bundestag and European parliamentarians and opinion makers to get our views across.  We need to also demonstrate that the U.S. has strong data privacy measures in place so that robust data sharing comes with robust data protections. Murphy
